www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 1   October 2014 
377
Series
Mental health interventions in schools 1
Mental health interventions in schools in high-income countries
Mina Fazel, Kimberly Hoagwood, Sharon Stephan, Tamsin Ford
Mental health services embedded within school systems can create a continuum of integrative care that improves both 
mental health and educational attainment for children. To strengthen this continuum, and for optimum child development, 
a reconﬁ guration of education and mental health systems to aid implementation of evidence-based practice might be 
needed. Integrative strategies that combine classroom-level and student-level interventions have much potential. A robust 
research agenda is needed that focuses on system-level implementation and maintenance of interventions over time. Both 
ethical and scientiﬁ c justiﬁ cations exist for integration of mental health and education: integration democratises access to 
services and, if coupled with use of evidence-based practices, can promote the healthy development of children.
Introduction
Children spend more time in school than in any other 
formal institutional structure.1 As such, schools play a key 
part in children’s development, from peer relationships and 
social interactions to academic attainment and cognitive 
progress, emotional control and behavioural expectations, 
and physical and moral development. All these areas are 
reciprocally aﬀ ected by mental health.
Increases in recognition of the eﬀ ect of mental health 
problems on academic attainment, and the unique 
platform that schools can oﬀ er in access to and support for 
children and adolescents with psychological diﬃ  culties, 
has led to an expansion of school-based mental health 
interventions in high-income countries.
In this Review on school-based mental health inter-
ventions and services in high-income countries, 
and the accompanying Review by Fazel and colleagues2 
in low-income and middle-income countries, we aim to 
contextualise and identify key areas for consideration 
and development of such services.3,4
In this Review we describe the salient issues in delivery 
of mental health services within school settings. Our 
overview is broad and includes examples of diﬀ erent 
interventions to illustrate types of provision. We summarise 
the epidemiology of psychiatric disorders in school-age 
children (aged 4–17 years) and describe speciﬁ c school-
related mental health issues. We discuss the range of 
mental health services delivered in schools because many 
diﬀ erent models exist with variations in professionals 
delivering the intervention, target groups, therapeutic 
modalities, and outcomes measured. We outline the 
restrictions of working within schools and challenges in 
implementation of evidence-based interventions in the 
school context. We conclude by emphasising the need to 
reconﬁ gure both health and education services to better 
promote children’s learning and development.
Mental health of children and school-speciﬁ c 
eﬀ ects
Epidemiological studies
Findings from epidemiological studies of high-income 
countries show a point prevalence of 8–18% for psychiatric 
disorders in school-age children, although many more 
children will have lower but still impairing levels of 
psychological distress.5 Childhood psychiatric disorders 
are associated with educational failure,6 which in turn is 
associated with increased rates of psychiatric disorders7 
and both are associated with a range of additional adverse 
outcomes, including risk-taking behaviour and being more 
likely to enter the criminal justice system.8–11 Children who 
are struggling with psychological symptoms do not form a 
discrete 
group; 
therefore, 
eﬀ ective 
mental 
health 
interventions could improve outcomes for all children, not 
only those with clinically signiﬁ cant psychiatric morbidity, 
which underscores the potential beneﬁ ts of universal 
interventions.12
The prevalence of psychiatric disorders varies with 
age.5 The most common diﬃ  culties in school-age 
children are disruptive behaviour and anxiety disorders. 
Separation anxiety and oppositional deﬁ ant disorder are 
seen mainly in primary school children (aged 4–10 years), 
whereas generalised anxiety, conduct disorder, and 
depression are more common in secondary school 
students (aged 11–18 years). Attention deﬁ cit hyper-
activity disorder (ADHD) and autism spectrum disorders 
pose particular diﬃ  culties for children in the school 
environment, and the incidence of eating disorders 
and psychosis starts to increase rapidly from mid-
adolescence onwards.
Childhood psychiatric disorders frequently persist.13 
In the combined British Child and Adolescent Mental 
Health Surveys (unpublished, TF), half of children 
with a psychiatric disorder at baseline had a psychiatric 
disorder 3 years later. In the Great Smoky Mountain 
Study,14 36·7% of children had at least one disorder 
diagnosed by age 16 years, and those with a psychiatric 
disorder were three times more likely to have a disorder 
in subsequent studies in both childhood and 
adulthood.15 Similarly, large epidemiological studies in 
adults show that childhood psychiatric disorders persist 
into adulthood.8,16 Notably, conduct disorder, which is 
sometimes dismissed as outside the remit of child 
mental health services, was a predictor for all adult 
psychiatric disorders, including psychosis, in the 
Lancet Psychiatry 2014; 
1: 377–87
This is the ﬁ rst in a Series of 
two papers about mental health 
interventions in schools
See Online for a podcast on 
mental health care in schools
Department of Psychiatry, 
University of Oxford, 
Warneford Hospital, Oxford, 
UK (M Fazel DM); Department 
of Child Psychiatry, New York 
University Langone Medical 
Center and School of Medicine, 
New York, NY, USA 
(Prof K Hoagwood PhD); 
Center for School Mental 
Health, Division of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 
University of Maryland School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 
USA (S Stephan PhD); and Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
University of Exeter Medical 
School, Veysey Building, Exeter, 
Devon, UK (Prof T Ford PhD)
Correspondence to:
Dr Mina Fazel, Department of 
Psychiatry, University of Oxford, 
Warneford Hospital, Oxford 
OX3 7JX, UK
mina.fazel@psych.ox.ac.uk
378 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 1   October 2014
Series
Dunedin cohort.8 A 14-year prospective cohort study of 
adolescents in Australia13 showed the importance of 
interventions to shorten the duration of episodes of 
mental illness for prevention of substantial morbidity 
in later life.
Some school-speciﬁ c factors are related to mental 
health during childhood. Bullying often takes place 
within the school context; a UK survey17 showed that 
46% of school-aged children had been bullied. The odds 
of suicidal ideation and suicidal attempts are more than 
doubled in young people who report peer victimisation.18 
Bullying can aﬀ ect children into adulthood with 
increases in the prevalence of anxiety, depression, and 
self-harm.19
Poor relationships between teachers and pupils are a 
predictor of the onset of childhood psychiatric disorders20 
and of low academic attainment.21 Policies associated 
with austerity in high-income countries reduce schools’ 
access to external support, while teachers report that 
stress resulting from disruptive behaviour is central to 
burnout and leaving the profession.22 The so-called 
burnout cascade,23 whereby diﬃ  culties with behavioural 
management 
can 
negatively 
aﬀ ect 
teacher–pupil 
relationships and the classroom environment, might 
damage both teacher and child mental health.
Needs assessment and screening
Many professionals working with children advocate the 
use of a multiple-gated screening system to determine 
mental health need in schools. This screening includes 
the administration of assessments to a speciﬁ ed group 
(gate 1), school mental health professionals processing 
and interpreting the data to identify which students 
meet a predetermined cutoﬀ  (gate 2), and then 
interviewing or assessing students who meet that cutoﬀ  
(gate 3).24 When done in the context of a multitiered 
system of support, assessment can include components 
that correspond with diﬀ erent types of interventions. For 
example, a school might complete a school climate scale 
(measures students’ or teachers’ perception of how the 
environment of classrooms and schools as a whole 
aﬀ ects education) to select a universal intervention of 
school-wide character development, or might use a 
screening programme to identify children at risk of 
suicide.25 Schools use various methods to identify 
students who could beneﬁ t from interventions, including 
functional behavioural assessment, teacher or student 
nomi nations, and systematic screening. Screening poses 
the risk of over-identiﬁ cation of children (false positives) 
and failure to recognise a condition (false negatives).26,27 
Provided these risks are managed, and if screening is 
done with standardised methods and by well trained 
staﬀ , with the informed consent of children and 
caregivers and within the context of available service 
capacity for those who screen positive, this technique 
can provide a useful mechanism for schools to identify 
and support students with psychological disorders.26,28
Providers of mental health services in schools
Substantial diﬀ erences exist between mental health 
services and educational services including professional 
qualiﬁ cations gained, funding mechanisms, and the 
criteria by which a child’s eligibility for access to services 
and outcomes are judged. Conceptualisations of the 
same child can vary, such that a child with depression 
can be perceived to be failing academically, disengaged, 
or even cognitively impaired, or alternatively might be 
regarded as having poor motivation or low self-esteem.
Responsibility for the mental health of children in 
schools is shared across service sectors but varies 
between countries. Responsibility is aﬀ ected by 
diﬀ erences in cultures, aims, and the social structure of 
the health versus school systems. In the USA, for 
example, introduction of the Individuals with Disabilities 
Education Act29 placed much of the responsibility 
for student mental health on the education system, at 
least for students whose mental health could be linked to 
educational success. However, even with evidence to 
support the positive eﬀ ect of the use of school resources 
(eg, teachers30 and school counsellors31), many schools 
rely heavily on community mental health services that 
are administratively and geographically outside the 
school system.32,33
Mental health services in schools are provided by staﬀ  
whose training or employment might be within 
education or health-care systems. A background in 
education could assist staﬀ  to manage the complex 
school culture, but education or school-employed staﬀ  
often need to prioritise educational targets. They might 
argue that their specialised training in school-based 
approaches positions them better than their non-school-
employed peers to meet both the mental health and 
educational needs of students. However, staﬀ  employed 
at schools are limited by school policies that restrict the 
type of services that they can provide, reducing their 
ability to meet speciﬁ c needs or serve speciﬁ c students. 
For example, because of funding and special education 
mandates, US school psychologists often spend much of 
their time undertaking routine psychological testing and 
eligibility assessments, rather than applying their 
broader consultative and intervention skills. In many 
countries, school-employed personnel work mainly with 
students who have educational diﬃ  culties that result 
from emotional and behavioural issues, and might not 
have had training in complex psychiatric presentations.
Community mental health professionals in schools 
work in a range of disciplines, including counselling, 
social work, occupational therapy, psychology, and 
psychiatry.34 Three broad models of integration are 
common: individuals from an outside agency are 
contracted to work within a school, the school includes a 
mental health clinic staﬀ ed by professionals who deliver 
mental health services, and the school has a health centre 
with mental health as a subspecialty. Counsellors and 
social workers are more likely to provide school-based 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 1   October 2014 
379
Series
mental health services than their psychology or psychiatry 
counterparts. In some countries, schools can partner with 
psychologists and psychiatrists to provide consultation 
and intervention for speciﬁ c students with complex 
challenges, but this model is unlikely to be scalable in view 
of the global scarcity of child and adolescent psychiatrists. 
Telemedicine can increase the capacity of mental health 
services in schools, although successful models have 
additional on-site school mental health providers to 
support engagement and continuous psycho social 
intervention. Some schools have recruited advanced nurse 
practitioners to manage the needs of students.35
Beyond traditional providers of mental health, the 
discipline has increasingly shifted towards inclusion of 
so-called natural supports, such as special education staﬀ  
and school nurses. Improved training and support of 
staﬀ  within schools in this role is a coherent and practical 
model that seems feasible and sustainable from a 
resource perspective and in view of the expanding 
literature about the model’s eﬀ ectiveness. Teachers are 
able to eﬀ ectively identify mental health problems in 
students, making them good gatekeepers and referral 
sources for mental health care.36 Although teacher-
implemented mental health promotion and prevention 
activities have a substantial eﬀ ect on the psychosocial 
and academic performance of students, some models 
have been less eﬀ ective than health-led interventions.37,38 
However, because of the demands placed on teachers to 
support the academic success of their students, 
introduction of an additional role of supporting student 
mental health is less feasible unless teachers are given 
suﬃ  cient training and time to do these responsibilities.39 
Models that integrate mental health promotion into the 
natural teaching context and incorporate coaching to 
increase a teacher’s belief in their own abilities should be 
further developed and assessed.
Mental health interventions in schools
An empirically derived approach to map intensity and 
type of school strategies to the needs of students has been 
used in parts of the USA.40 This tiered approach41 includes 
universal strategies for all students, followed by 
interventions to assist selected students who face 
particular risks, and ﬁ nally a tier with treatment 
interventions for those with the greatest needs. An 
advantage of this public health and tiered approach is that 
schools and teachers can support students with varying 
needs and also create classroom and whole-school 
environments that support the learning of all children.
Schools in many high-income countries have long 
delivered public health education and services, such as 
immunisation programmes and health and sex 
education.42–44 Provision of mental health services in 
schools is quite new and mainly addresses the academic 
eﬀ ect of mental health diﬃ  culties that are not being 
met by external mental health services. The specialty 
incorporates mental health promotion, prevention, and 
treatment. Many interventions address overlapping 
areas, showing the present movement towards 
multitiered systems of supports in which school mental 
health is delivered across a full continuum of care. The 
ultimate aim is to promote student wellbeing, prevent 
the development or worsening of mental health 
problems, and improve the eﬀ ectiveness of education.45,46
Mental health promotion
Principles of school mental health promotion have been 
espoused since Plato’s Republic, in which he identiﬁ ed 
the importance of the school environment to children’s 
social development, noting that “by maintaining a sound 
system of education and upbringing, you produce 
citizens of good character”. Universal promotion of 
mental health programmes often focuses on constructs 
such as social and emotional skills, positive behaviours, 
social inclusion, eﬀ ective problem solving, and good 
citizenry.47–49 A meta-analysis50 emphasised the academic 
beneﬁ ts of mental health promotion in schools because 
schools with social emotional learning programmes had 
an average increase of 11–17 percentile points on 
standardised tests compared with scores from non-
intervention schools.51 In whole-school and classroom-
based interventions, universal promotion programmes 
are often delivered by the school’s own staﬀ ,36 and are 
done in both primary and secondary schools.52
An example is MindMatters, developed in the late 
1990s. This approach is the leading national initiative 
for promotion of mental health in schools in Australia, 
with substantial national investment to equip schools 
and educators with skills to promote students’ 
wellbeing.53,54 Speciﬁ c strategies to help students include 
social and emotional learning programmes, increasing 
students’ connection to school, building student skills 
in understanding and management of emotions, 
eﬀ ective communication, and stress management. 
Teachers participate in various professional development 
opportunities to support their learning in these 
curricular domains. In the USA, programmes such as I 
Can Problem Solve,55 and the Good Behavior Game,56 
have documented success in the short term and long 
term. Interventions to help behaviour management with 
whole-school or classroom-based programmes have 
increasing empirical support. For example, Positive 
Behavior Interventions and Supports (PBIS) oﬀ ers a 
framework for multitiered interventions. Implementation 
of its primary prevention tier, which includes how to 
deﬁ ne, teach, and reward appropriate behaviour  
alongside a continuum of consequences for problem 
behaviour, was highly successful.57,58
Mental health prevention: a multitiered approach
Overview
Schools are an ideal setting for capturing the entire 
population of children, and therefore a three-tiered 
approach has become an accepted model for con-
380 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 1   October 2014
Series
ceptualising the range of interventions to prevent 
students from developing psychiatric problems. The 
three components are universal, selective, and indicated 
interventions. Because early intervention can positively 
change the mental health trajectories for youth at risk of 
mental illness, many high-income countries are turning 
to this three-tiered model. Universal interventions target 
the whole school or classroom, selective interventions 
are targeted to population subgroups whose risk of 
developing a mental disorder is signiﬁ cantly higher 
than average, and indicated and treatment interventions 
target 
young 
people 
already 
exhibiting 
clinical 
symptoms.5 Indicated interventions overlap conceptually 
with mental health treatments and can include inter-
ventions for emotional disturbance,59 anxiety disorders,60 
depression,61 and post-traumatic stress symptoms,62 in 
addition to substance misuse.63,64 Studies show that 
evidence-based treatments can be delivered in school 
settings, group models tend to be eﬀ ective, and that 
engagement and participation rates tend to be high. 
However, few rigorous assessments have been done of 
school-based interventions for students with disabilities 
or for speciﬁ c disorders, including eating disorders or 
complex neurodevelopmental disorders.65
Universal approaches
Universal approaches have particular appeal because 
they are the least intrusive, potentially incur the lowest 
cost, and therefore have the greatest chance of adoption 
in the school setting.66 Additionally, schools might prefer 
these approaches because they are easier than other 
approaches to incorporate into the structure of the school 
and do not exclude students who might potentially 
beneﬁ t from what is oﬀ ered.67 However, because 
universal approaches are comprehensive, they can also 
be diﬃ  cult to implement and need a concerted eﬀ ort by 
administrative leadership and all school staﬀ . Universal 
approaches have been studied for a broad range of 
presentations, including behavioural management, risky 
behaviours, and mood and anxiety disorders.68
A wide range of universal interventions have been tried 
in schools in children of various age ranges, and with 
various therapists and therapeutic modalities such as 
cognitive behavioural approaches (CBT) and stress 
reduction techniques. Several systematic reviews of CBT-
based interventions in schools have been done,60,61,69,70 
with a main focus on prevention of anxiety disorders60 
and depression.61 The CBT-based interventions included 
many universal prevention programmes. For example, in 
a systematic review of anxiety disorders,60 investigators 
assessed 12 randomised controlled trials and recorded 
that the universal programmes had the largest eﬀ ect 
sizes compared with selective and indicated programmes. 
However, the eﬀ ect of these programmes on anxiety 
prevention was slight, with most averaging eﬀ ect sizes 
(Cohen’s d) around 0·3 after intervention. For prevention 
of depression, 20 randomised controlled trials including 
more than 10 000 participants showed that universal 
interventions were less eﬀ ective than selective and 
indicated programmes,61 leading to debate as to whether 
these programmes should be widely disseminated before 
more evidence is collected.71
One of the largest studies of universal interventions for 
prevention of depression was Beyondblue.72 This study 
showed that an Australian classroom CBT-based 
curriculum of 30 sessions delivered by teachers did not 
reduce levels of depressive symptoms in adolescents. 
This result might emphasise the diﬃ  culties faced in 
attempts to implement large-scale school-based universal 
interventions, with training of teachers in a new 
technique, and with engaging of adolescents in pre-
vention programmes. Promoting Alternative Thinking 
Strategies is a widely used intervention in primary 
schools73 and FRIENDS for Life is a ten-lesson 
programme, which has had variable success as a 
universal intervention for both anxiety and depression, 
although it was initially developed as a selective inter-
vention.38,66 Some data suggest that children identiﬁ ed as 
at low risk of mental health problems might beneﬁ t more 
from the interventions than would those at higher 
risk.38,74 The Resourceful Adolescent Programme75 is 
another universal intervention that aims to develop 
adolescents’ self-esteem, conﬂ ict resolution, and stress 
management skills, with most studies showing a 
reduction in adolescent depression.
Selective approaches
In schools, several prevention eﬀ orts have been successful 
in addressing risk factors, including interventions to 
decrease substance misuse in adolescents who score 
highly on certain personality measures, suggesting an 
increased risk of problems with sub stance misuse.63 
The interventions promote awareness of personality-
associated cognitive distortions and alternative coping 
strategies, and ultimately reduce development of some 
problem behaviours. Prevention programmes are often 
delivered in classrooms or small groups—eg, the Coping 
Power Program76 for students at high risk of aggressive 
behaviours, drug misuse, and delinquency. An evidence 
base is also emerging for provision of school-based 
services to speciﬁ c populations, such as young people 
from low-income urban regions,77 and refugees.78
Evidence for selective school-based prevention and 
early intervention programmes is strong for speciﬁ c 
behavioural diﬃ  culties, for students with risks (such as 
parental divorce), and for students with anxiety or  
depressive disorders.60,61,79
Indicated approaches
Many studies have assessed indicated school-based 
programmes for anxiety or depression, deliberate self-
harm, and post-traumatic stress disorder.61,62,80,81 Indicated 
programmes generally show stronger outcomes for 
depression and a greater reduction in symptoms of 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 1   October 2014 
381
Series
depression than universal or selective programmes do.61 
Few evidence-based trials have been done of suicide 
prevention.82 Successful interventions to treat post-
traumatic stress disorder include the ten-session Cognitive 
Behavioural Intervention In Schools for students with a 
history of exposure to potentially traumatic events.62
Community-based mental health treatment
Community-partnered school mental health services, 
delivered by staﬀ  employed in community-based 
agencies, often augment existing behavioural health 
supports for students. Consultation in mainstream 
schools by mental health specialists can assist with 
case conceptualisation, diﬀ erential diagnosis, or con-
siderations for community care. Some schools employ or 
have links with community-based partners to provide on-
site individual, family, and group treatment for students 
with identiﬁ ed problems such as anxiety, depression, 
disruptive behaviour disorders, and traumatic stress. 
Intensive treatment often takes place during the school 
day, which can be more time eﬃ  cient for both students 
and parents. Increasingly, school-employed staﬀ  are 
enhancing their capacity to deliver specialised mental 
health treatment for students. A study83 of interpersonal 
therapy given in school-based health centres showed that 
the therapy eﬀ ectively treated adolescent depression. 
Additional service developments in schools include 
treatment of serious emotional disturbances84 and 
reduction of the duration of untreated psychosis.85
Special educational schools or classrooms (for children 
with severe emotional and behavioural diﬃ  culties) are at 
one end of the range of mental health needs in schools 
and are found to variable extents in high-income 
countries. Such establishments might have a high 
proportion of children with both treated and untreated 
mental illness. Alignment of these schools or classrooms 
with community mental health services is often needed, 
but not universally available.86
Gaps in school-based research and challenges in 
implementation
Research about school-based interventions has restrictions 
and these could obscure important eﬀ ects (panel). These 
restrictions include a reliance on small studies, use of non-
random designs, wide variation in outcome measures that 
might not be validated or educationally relevant, and 
diﬃ  culty in generalisation to other contexts because of 
factors unique to speciﬁ c school settings. Furthermore, 
although understanding about the eﬀ ectiveness of 
treatments is increasing, research of ﬁ delity to these 
treatments when delivered and implemented in schools is 
scarce.87 Interventions need to be tested in real-world 
settings and embedded process assessments are important 
to identify facilitators and barriers in diﬀ erent school 
contexts.88 Many of these issues were emphasised in a 
systematic review89 about school-based psychosocial 
interventions for pupils with ADHD, which suggested that 
such interventions led to positive results on academic 
progress and core ADHD symptoms. However, the study 
methods varied, so the results did not allow practitioners 
to diﬀ erentiate which aspects of what interventions were 
eﬀ ective and therefore worth using. Additionally, no cost-
eﬀ ectiveness studies were done, thereby restricting 
the generalisability.90 The few cost-eﬀ ectiveness studies 
available show methodological concerns about how to 
undertake such assessments and how to make them 
relevant and meaningful—eg, in the case of a universal 
classroom CBT-based intervention that showed no 
evidence of cost-eﬀ ectiveness.91 Furthermore, when 
mental health interventions have been made available in 
the school context, they are often not accessed by the 
Panel: Research gaps and service development priorities for mental health in schools
1) Identiﬁ cation of mechanisms and processes to use to maximise eﬀ ectiveness of 
interventions in schools, including
• 
Universal screening methods and processes that promote early identiﬁ cation and 
reduce duration of untreated mental health problems
• 
Identiﬁ cation of screening thresholds by which to select children to participate in 
interventions
• 
Development of speciﬁ c implementation strategies to improve uptake, ﬁ delity, 
and continuous learning for people delivering mental health interventions
• 
Development of measures that integrate health, mental health, and educational 
outcomes to show individual, family, peer, classroom, and system-level improvements
• 
Comparative tests of optimum modes of delivery for speciﬁ c interventions such as 
individual, group, classroom, and whole-school, as well as unifying elements of 
successful interventions
• 
Determination of best age range for speciﬁ c interventions and studies that target 
secondary school settings and special educational settings
2) Research of interventions in schools for children with emerging or established mental 
health problems, including
• 
Eating disorders
• 
Self-harming behaviours
• 
Neurodevelopmental disorders such as attention deﬁ cit hyperactivity disorder 
or autism spectrum disorders
• 
Psychosis
• 
Bipolar disorders
3) Development and assessment of young people and family peer models to promote 
engagement in schools
4) Education and health interface for
• 
Interdisciplinary research that promotes collaborative scientiﬁ c inquiry between 
education, mental health, and health researchers
• 
Development of new models for integration of health and mental health in schools
• 
Use of digital technologies to aid implementation and monitor improvements 
in strategies
• 
Development of quality indicators to link educational services to health services
• 
Development of strategies, rather than programmes, which build on the naturally 
occurring ecologies within schools to strengthen skills and competencies around 
mental health identiﬁ cation and intervention
5) Clariﬁ cation of consent and conﬁ dentiality procedures to aid and accelerate research 
and clinical practice in schools
382 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 1   October 2014
Series
students. For example, although one study showed that an 
intervention was eﬀ ective in treating symptoms of 
depression, more than 60% of eligible participants refused 
the intervention, possibly because of the legacy of stigma 
aﬀ ecting mental health diagnosis and treatment, and 
perceptions of patients not needing or not thinking they 
can helped by services.25
School-based services are unlikely to be a panacea for 
identiﬁ cation and treatment of all childhood mental 
illnesses. Some children do not attend school, might feel 
estranged from their school, or prefer to receive mental 
health services outside the school context. Agreement 
between parents, young people, and teachers about 
young people’s mental health and wellbeing is low in 
systematic studies,92 which probably relates to diﬀ erent 
frames of reference, true diﬀ erences in functioning in 
diﬀ erent settings, and measurement error. Some young 
people might fear labelling and medicalisation if teachers 
have a prominent role in the detection of psychological 
distress; these issues need careful attention in training 
for teachers about mental health. Which presentations of 
illness and treatments are better suited for the school or 
community services are important questions to clarify. 
Additionally, not all interventions done in schools have 
produced positive results and the potential for adverse 
eﬀ ects from psychological interventions should be 
acknowledged and monitored.93
Implementation of eﬀ ective interventions in schools 
has many challenges, and these are beginning to be 
systematically catalogued.94 The scientiﬁ c base for 
implementation is growing and being applied to mental 
health integration in schools.95–97 Development of the 
scientiﬁ c base is important to avoid the typical trajectory 
of mental health practices in schools, commonly 
characterised by incomplete implementation, restricted 
sustainability, and narrow spread.98–100 Poorly assessed 
interventions are often used in schools, and when 
schools do use evidence-based interventions, they are 
often implemented with poor ﬁ delity.101,102
Understanding of the classroom factors that can 
increase social-emotional functioning and academic 
success is now clearer than it was previously.103–105 Studies 
of classroom-based interventions are increasingly 
focused on either universal or selective strategies (eg, 
Promoting Alternative Thinking Strategies106 and self-
monitoring107), and studies suggest that improvement of 
the classroom context enables teachers to set positive 
behavioural norms, which, in turn, strengthens 
teacher–student interactions. Training and feedback can 
improve implementation of universal and selective 
interventions.108–112 
Integrative 
studies 
that 
target 
structured support for the use of universal and selective 
interventions addressing both emotional–behavioural 
functioning and contextual factors are now emerging. 
This important dual approach is comprehensive, draws 
upon school staﬀ , addresses educational and mental 
health issues, and improves implementation.
An integrative study that combines universal and 
targeted interventions is BRIDGE (bridging mental 
health and education in urban schools).113 A randomised 
trial of this intervention showed improved classroom-
level and student-level outcomes. The strategies applied 
were empirically derived104,114–116 and tested in 36 urban 
secondary school classrooms—a challenging environ-
ment in view of the complex needs of the student 
population. This study showed improved relationships 
between teachers and students, student academic 
self-concept, and peer-reported victimisation. The 
hypothesised mechanisms of change targeted teacher–
student interactions, with the aim to change the class-
room norms and improve academic engagement.117,118
A common barrier to the implementation of evidence-
based interventions in schools is poor engagement of all 
levels of school staﬀ —ie, teachers, counsellors, and 
support staﬀ .67,119 Additional barriers exist across 
individual (stigma, help-seeking behaviours, mental 
health status, parental risk factors), community 
(geographic and social location), and system (funding, 
waiting times, availability of trained personnel, and 
fragmentation of services) levels.120 Several factors aﬀ ect 
implementation across these three levels, from the 
competing priorities of stakeholders involved (children, 
parents,121 school staﬀ , educational authorities, and 
mental health services) to the focus of the intervention 
(whole school, classroom, teacher, family or screening, 
promotion, prevention, treatment) and the outcomes of 
interest 
(educational 
achievements, 
psychological 
measures, social functioning). Implementation science 
helps to advance the understanding of core organisation 
(culture, climate, leadership), classroom, and teaching 
practices that can impede or aid uptake of evidence-based 
interventions. The models to improve implementation 
are complex and multitiered, but manageable when 
systematic approaches are taken.122,123
A challenge for both research and practice will be to test 
strategies to implement and sustain integrated whole-
school, classroom-level, and individual-level interventions. 
This strategy will require the development of interventions 
that are feasible, low burden, and can be easily integrated 
into routine school schedules. Consultation and training 
strategies that rely on resources already available within 
schools will be especially important.33,108,113 Research about 
the imple mentation and dissemination of integrative 
contextual approaches to mental health in schools can use 
theoretical models of implementation. The EPIS model 
(exploration, 
preparation, 
implementation, 
sustain-
ability)123 identiﬁ es diﬀ erent implementation phases and 
aspects of the outer and inner context that are salient at 
diﬀ erent phases. This model can be especially useful for 
guiding of research because it explicitly acknowledges 
how diﬀ erent variables can play a crucial part at speciﬁ c 
points in the implementation process. Similarly, lessons 
about implementation can be learnt from other successful 
public health programmes within schools.124
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 1   October 2014 
383
Series
The application to school systems of methods to 
improve health-care quality is a promising approach. For 
example, Nadeem and colleagues125 identiﬁ ed 14 cross-
cutting components as common factors in improvement 
of health-care quality including in-person learning 
sessions, phone meetings, data reporting, leadership 
involvement, and training in quality improvement 
methods. Similarly, cross-site learning, social net-
works,126,127 and harnessing of the expertise of key opinion 
leaders128 seem crucial, as do the commitment of 
leadership128 and promotion of team eﬀ ectiveness.129 
Implementation studies97,120 suggest that development of 
a multitiered system of support, in which there are in-
built assessments to monitor progress and ﬁ delity for 
selected interventions, is needed to obtain positive 
eﬀ ects on children’s mental health.
Complex ethical considerations exist when working 
with children in schools. Mental health services have 
clear pathways and requirements to gain consent and 
inform caregivers.130,131 In schools, the services oﬀ ered 
might be viewed as general school provision and 
individual consent for speciﬁ c services might not be 
perceived as necessary. A child might see a school nurse 
or counsellor without parental knowledge or consent. 
Clear protocols are important to allow information 
sharing, which might prove beneﬁ cial to both academic 
and health outcomes, but privacy and conﬁ dentiality are 
essential to maintain therapeutic relationships.
Conclusion
Mental health services when embedded within 
educational systems create a continuum of integrative 
care that can promote health, mental health, and 
educational attainment. Strategies to integrate the 
diﬀ erent tiers of interventions within a school, and use 
of resources from within the school, are probably the 
most sustainable.
Service systems that support educational and mental 
health promotion, prevention, and treatment are 
administratively, legislatively, and politically separate.132 
Education and health policies are progressively convergent 
on a set of quality indicators that, if enacted, can support a 
comprehensive continuum of services for children and 
families. These indicators include accountable care 
organisations, the meaningful use of data to improve 
quality, and pay-for-performance incentives to promote 
healthy behaviours. Many countries (eg, Australia, the 
UK, and the USA) have also had an increase in local 
control, which aﬀ ects school mental health services in 
relation to competing demands. Tensions between mental 
health and other school priorities have prevented some 
schools and education services from placing resources in 
mental health provision. Agreement about which entity or 
organisation owns or is responsible for mental health 
services (schools vs the community) is a debate that is 
being replaced by models of shared ownership. These 
models include families, schools, and communities 
identifying evidence-based programmes and working 
together to establish a full continuum of services.133
Improved collaboration between education and health 
sectors would be enhanced by mutual contributions to 
basic professional training. At present, speciﬁ c training 
for most mental health professionals to become familiar 
with the school context is scarce.134 Some practice 
guidelines have been developed,135 but opportunities for 
trainees to work closely with schools might increase 
appreciation of the school context and develop 
consultation-liaison skills.136 Standard teacher training 
programmes need to incorporate curricula targeted at the 
most common mental health issues likely to be present in 
schools. These curricula include mental health screening 
and identiﬁ cation of common presentations of mental 
health issues. Similarly, training teachers in mental health 
promotion skills might not only assist in identiﬁ cation 
and referral for children who need it, but also help 
teachers feel less overwhelmed by the emotional and 
behavioural challenges in their classrooms.40,120
Poor prioritisation of child and adolescent health and 
mental health restricts the positive possibilities of 
integrative services.137–139 Evidence that mental health is 
crucial for child development is clear, and schools are 
where children spend much of their time. Furthermore, 
economic analyses of British mental health-related 
service contacts show large costs to schools and special 
educational services that were greater than costs of 
mental health to other public sectors.140 Despite this high 
cost, the services typically did not include empirically 
supported 
therapeutic 
practices, 
suggesting 
that 
substantial time and resources could be redirected to 
evidence-based school interventions for mental health.
Search strategy and selection criteria
We searched the literature with Scopus to identify meta-
analyses, systematic reviews, and narrative reviews about 
school-based mental health interventions published between 
Jan 1, 2000, and May 31, 2014, with no language restrictions. 
We used combinations of the search terms “mental health“ or 
“psych*”, and “school*“, and “intervention*“ or “service“ and 
“review“. This search identiﬁ ed 37 articles; we added further 
landmark studies and sought additional expert opinion to 
ensure the most relevant information was included. We used 
the Institute of Medicine framework to help categorise the 
range of diﬀ erent interventions that are undertaken in school 
settings.40 The framework diﬀ erentiates between mental health 
promotion, prevention, and treatment, and although some 
interventions will span across these categories, we adhered to 
this framework. The interventions consist of a scale ranging 
from universal interventions that are mainly mental health 
promotion and prevention interventions, to more selective 
interventions for children at high risk of developing disorders. 
Interventions that are indicated target children with identiﬁ ed 
disabilities and include both prevention and treatment.40
384 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 1   October 2014
Series
The evidence base for the eﬀ ectiveness of interventions 
to support positive gains in students’ social-emotional and 
academic outcomes is strong. The knowledge base of 
eﬀ ective classroom interventions to improve teacher–
student interactions and classroom behaviour is expanding. 
Integrative strategies that combine classroom-level and 
student-level interventions have potential to sustain 
educational, health, and mental health improvements for 
children. Future research should focus on system-level 
implementation and maintenance of these integrative 
interventions over time.
Both an ethical and a scientiﬁ c argument exist for 
improving access for all children, irrespective of their 
income, to high quality mental health services.141,142,143 A 
population-based approach will ensure that young 
people can access preventive and treatment services 
whenever they are needed. Application of the evidence 
base can ensure quality, but public and political will are 
needed to ensure that the evidence base is successfully 
implemented universally.
Contributors
All authors contributed to the ﬁ rst draft and subsequent revisions of 
the Review. 
Declaration of interests
MF received support from the National Institute for Health Research 
(NIHR) Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care 
Oxford at Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust. The views expressed are 
those of the author and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR, or the 
Department of Health. We declare no other competing interests.
References
1 
Rutter M, Maughan B, Mortimore P, Outsen J. Fifteen thousand 
hours: secondary schools and their eﬀ ects on children. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press; 1979.
2 
Fazel M, Patel V, Thomas S, Tol W. Mental health interventions 
in schools in low-income and middle-income countries. 
Lancet Psychiatry 2014; 1: 388–98.
3 
Zins J, Bloodworth M, Weissberg R, Walberg H. The scientiﬁ c base 
linking social and emotional learning to school success. In: Zins J, 
Weissberg R, Wang M, Walberg H, eds. Building academic success 
on social and emotional learning: what does the research say? 
New York, NY: Teachers College Press, 2004.
4 
Stephan SH, Weist M, Kataoka S, Adelsheim S, Mills C. 
Transformation of children’s mental health services: the role of 
school mental health. Psychiatr Serv 2007; 58: 1330–38.
5 
Costello EJ, Egger H, Angold A. 10-year research update review: 
the epidemiology of child and adolescent psychiatric disorders: I. 
Methods and public health burden. J Am Acad Child Adolesc 
Psychiatry 2005; 44: 972–86.
6 
Riglin L, Frederickson N, Shelton KH, Rice F. A longitudinal study 
of psychological functioning and academic attainment at the 
transition to secondary school. J Adolesc 2013; 36: 507–17.
7 
Trzesniewski KH, Donnellan MB, Moﬃ  tt TE, Robins RW, 
Poulton R, Caspi A. Low self-esteem during adolescence predicts 
poor health, criminal behavior, and limited economic prospects 
during adulthood. Dev Psychol 2006; 42: 381–90.
8 
Kim-Cohen J, Caspi A, Moﬃ  tt TE, Harrington H, Milne BJ, 
Poulton R. Prior juvenile diagnoses in adults with mental disorder: 
developmental follow-back of a prospective-longitudinal cohort. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2003; 60: 709–17.
9 
Collishaw S, Maughan B, Goodman R, Pickles A. Time trends in 
adolescent mental health. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2004; 45: 1350–62.
10 
Whear R, Marlow R, Boddy K, et al. Psychiatric disorder or impairing 
psychology in children who have been excluded from school: a 
systematic review. School Psych Int 2014; 35: 530–43.
11 
Ramey CT, Ramey SL. In defense of special education. Am Psychol 
1998; 53: 1159–60.
12 
Goodman A, Goodman R. Population mean scores predict child 
mental disorder rates: validating SDQ prevalence estimators in 
Britain. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2011; 52: 100–08.
13 
Patton GC, Coﬀ ey C, Romaniuk H, et al. The prognosis of common 
mental disorders in adolescents: a 14-year prospective cohort study. 
Lancet 2014; 383: 1404–11.
14 
Copeland WE, Angold A, Shanahan L, Costello EJ. Longitudinal 
patterns of anxiety from childhood to adulthood: the Great Smoky 
Mountains Study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2014; 53: 21–33.
15 
Costello EJ, Mustillo S, Erkanli A, Keeler G, Angold A. Prevalence 
and development of psychiatric disorders in childhood and 
adolescence. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2003; 60: 837–44.
16 
Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Merikangas KR, 
Walters EE. Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of 
DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2005; 62: 593–602.
17 
DCSF Department for Children, Schools, and Families. Working 
together to safeguard children: a guide to inter-agency working to 
safeguard and promote the welfare of children. Nottingham, UK: 
Department for Children, Schools, and Families, HM Government, 
2010.
18 
van Geel M, Vedder P, Tanilon J. Relationship between peer 
victimization, cyberbullying, and suicide in children and 
adolescents: a meta-analysis. JAMA Pediatr 2014; 168: 435–42.
19 
Meltzer H, Vostanis P, Ford T, Bebbington P, Dennis MS. Victims 
of bullying in childhood and suicide attempts in adulthood. 
Eur Psychiatry 2011; 26: 498–503.
20 Lang IA, Marlow R, Goodman R, Meltzer H, Ford T. Inﬂ uence of 
problematic child-teacher relationships on future psychiatric 
disorder: population survey with 3-year follow-up. Br J Psychiatry 
2013; 202: 336–41.
21 
Cadima J, Leal T, Burchinal M. The quality of teacher-student 
interactions: associations with ﬁ rst graders’ academic and 
behavioral outcomes. J Sch Psychol 2010; 48: 457–82.
22 Kokkinos CM. Job stressors, personality and burnout in primary 
school teachers. Br J Educ Psychol 2007; 77: 229–43.
23 Jennings PA, Frank JL, Snowberg KE, Coccia MA, Greenberg MT. 
Improving classroom learning environments by Cultivating 
Awareness and Resilience in Education (CARE): results of a 
randomized controlled trial. Sch Psychol Q 2013; 28: 374–90.
24 
Walker H, Small J, Severson H, Seeley J, Feil E. Multiple-gating 
approaches in universal screening within school and community 
settings. In: Kettler RJ, Glover TA, Albers CA, Feeney-Kettler KA, 
eds. Universal screening in educational settings: evidence-based 
decision making for schools. Washington: American Psychological 
Association, 2013: 47–75.
25 Gould MS, Marrocco FA, Hoagwood K, Kleinman M, Amakawa L, 
Altschuler E. Service use by at-risk youths after school-based suicide 
screening. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2009; 48: 1193–201.
26 Goodman R, Ford T, Simmons H, Gatward R, Meltzer H. Using the 
Strengths and Diﬃ  culties Questionnaire (SDQ) to screen for child 
psychiatric disorders in a community sample. Br J Psychiatry 2000; 
177: 534–39.
27 
Gould MS, Greenberg T, Velting DM, Shaﬀ er D. Youth suicide risk 
and preventive interventions: a review of the past 10 years. 
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2003; 42: 386–405.
28 Weist MD, Rubin M, Moore E, Adelsheim S, Wrobel G. Mental 
health screening in schools. J Sch Health 2007; 77: 53–58.
29 US Department of Education (IDEA). Individuals with Disabilities 
Education Improvement Act, 2004. http://idea.ed.gov/ (accessed 
Sep 21, 2014).
30 Franklin CGS, Kim JS, Ryan TN, Kelly MS, Montgomery KL. 
Teacher involvement in school mental health interventions: a 
systematic review. Child Youth Serv Rev 2012; 34: 973–82.
31 
Cooper M. Counselling in UK secondary schools: a comprehensive 
review of audit and evaluation data. Couns Psychother Res 2009; 
9: 137–50.
32 Foster S, Rollefson M, Doksum T, Noonan D, Robinson G, Teich J. 
School mental health services in the United States, 2000–2003. 
Rockville, MD: Center for Mental Health Services, Substance Abuse 
and Mental Health Services Administration, 2005.
33 Atkins MS, Frazier SL. Expanding the toolkit or changing the 
paradigm: are we ready for a public health approach to mental 
health? Perspect Psychol Sci 2011; 6: 483–87.
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 1   October 2014 
385
Series
34 
Allen-Meares P, Montgomery KL, Kim JS. School-based social work 
interventions: a cross-national systematic review. Social Work 
(United States) 2013; 58: 253–62.
35 Grady BJ, Lever N, Cunningham D, Stephan S. Telepsychiatry and 
school mental health. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin 2011; 20: 81–94.
36 Severson H, Walker H. Proactive approaches for identifying 
children at-risk for socio-behavioral problems. In: Lane KL, 
Gresham FM, O’Shaughnessy TE, eds. Interventions for children 
with or at risk for emotional and behavioral disorders. Boston, USA: 
Allyn and Bacon; 2002.
37 
Kellam SG, Mackenzie AC, Brown CH, et al. The good behavior 
game and the future of prevention and treatment. 
Addict Sci Clin Pract 2011; 6: 73–84.
38 Stallard P, Skryabina E, Taylor G, et al. Classroom-based cognitive 
behaviour therapy (FRIENDS): a cluster randomised controlled trial 
to Prevent Anxiety in Children through Education in Schools 
(PACES). Lancet Psychiatry 2014; 1: 185–92.
39 Shepherd J, Dewhirst S, Picknett K, et al. Factors facilitating and 
constraining the delivery of eﬀ ective teacher training to promote 
health and well-being in schools: a survey of current practice and 
systematic review. Public Health Res 2013; 1.
40 
National Research Council (US) and Institute of Medicine (US) 
Committee on the Prevention of Mental Disorders and Substance 
Abuse Among Children, Youth, and Young Adults: research 
advances and promising interventions. O’Connell ME, Boat T, 
Warner KE, eds. Preventing mental, emotional and behavioural 
disorders among young people: progress and possibilities. 
Washington, DC: National Academic Press (US), 2009. 
41 
Nastasi BK, Moore RB, Varjas KM. School-based mental health 
services: creating comprehensive and culturally speciﬁ c programs. 
Washington DC: American Psychological Association; 2004.
42 
Mason-Jones AJ, Crisp C, Momberg M, Koech J, De Koker P, 
Mathews C. A systematic review of the role of school-based 
healthcare in adolescent sexual, reproductive, and mental health. 
Syst Rev 2012; 1: 49.
43 
Lima-Serrano M, Lima-Rodríguez JS. Impact of school-based health 
promotion interventions aimed at diﬀ erent behavioral domains: 
a systematic review. Gac Sanit 2014; online publication June 9. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2014.05.003.
44 
Hale DR, Fitzgerald-Yau N, Viner RM. A systematic review of 
eﬀ ective interventions for reducing multiple health risk behaviors 
in adolescence. Am J Public Health 2014; 104: e19–e41.
45 
Barret S, Eber L, Weist M. Advancing education eﬀ ectiveness: 
interconnecting school mental health and school-wide positive 
behavior support. University of Oregon, Eugene: OSEP Technical 
Assistance Center on Positive Behavioral Interventions and 
Supports, 2013.
46 Lean D, Colucci V. School-based mental health: a framework for 
intervention. Plymouth, UK: Rowman & Littleﬁ eld Education; 
2013.
47 
Wells J, Barlow J, Stewart-Brown S. A systematic review of universal 
approaches to mental health promotion in schools. Health Educ 
2003; 103: 197–220.
48 
Sklad M, Diekstra R, Ritter MD, Ben J, Gravesteijn C. Eﬀ ectiveness 
of school-based universal social, emotional, and behavioral 
programs: do they enhance students’ development in the area of 
skill, behavior, and adjustment? Psychol Schls 2012; 49: 892–909.
49 
Schachter HM, Girardi A, Ly M, et al. Eﬀ ects of school-based 
interventions on mental health stigmatization: a systematic review. 
Child Adolesc Psychiatry Ment Health 2008; 2: 18.
50 Payton J, Weissberg R, Durlak JA, et al. The positive impact of 
social and emotional learning for kindergarten to eighth-grade 
students: Findings from three scientiﬁ c reviews. Chicago, IL: 
Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning, 2008.
51 
Durlak JA, Weissberg RP, Dymnicki AB, Taylor RD, Schellinger KB. 
The impact of enhancing students’ social and emotional learning: 
a meta-analysis of school-based universal interventions. Child Dev 
2011; 82: 405–32.
52 Cheyne G, Schlosser A, Nash P, Glover L. Targeted group-based 
interventions in schools to promote emotional well-being: a 
systematic review. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry 2014; 19: 412–38.
53 Rowling L. School mental health promotion: MindMatters as an 
example of mental health reform. Health Promot J Austr 2007; 
18: 229–35.
54 
Wyn J, Cahill H, Holdsworth R, Rowling L, Carson S. MindMatters, 
a whole-school approach promoting mental health and wellbeing. 
Aust NZ J Psychiatry 2000; 34: 594–601.
55 Shure M. I can problem solve: an interpersonal cognitive problem-
solving program for children. Champaign, IL: Research Press; 
2001.
56 Embry DD. The good behavior game: a best practice candidate as a 
universal behavioral vaccine. Clin Child Fam Psych 2002; 5: 273–97.
57 
Horner R, Sugai G, Smolkowski K, et al. A randomized, wait-list 
controlled eﬀ ectiveness trial assessing school-wide positive behavior 
support in elementary schools. J Posit Behav Interv 2009; 
11: 259–390.
58 Bradshaw CP, Koth C, Bevans K, Ialongo NS, Leaf P. The impact of 
school-wide positive behavioral interventions and supports (PBIS) 
on the organizational health of elementary schools. School Psychol Q 
2008; 23: 462–73.
59 Reddy LA, Richardson L. School-based prevention and intervention 
programs for children with emotional disturbance. Educ Treat Child 
2006; 29: 379–404.
60 Neil AL, Christensen H. Eﬃ  cacy and eﬀ ectiveness of school-based 
prevention and early intervention programs for anxiety. 
Clin Psychol Rev 2009; 29: 208–15.
61 
Calear AL, Christensen H. Systematic review of school-based 
prevention and early intervention programs for depression. 
J Adolesc 2010; 33: 429–38.
62 Stein B, Jaycox L, Kataoka S, et al. Mental health intervention for 
schoolchildren exposed to violence. A randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA 2003; 290: 603–11.
63 Conrod PJ, Castellanos-Ryan N, Mackie C. Long-term eﬀ ects of a 
personality-targeted intervention to reduce alcohol use in 
adolescents. J Consult Clin Psychol 2011; 79: 296–306.
64 
Gandhi AG, Murphy-Graham E, Petrosino A, Chrismer SS, 
Weiss CH. The devil is in the details: Examining the evidence for 
“proven” school-based drug abuse prevention programs. 
Evaluation Rev 2007; 31: 43–74.
65 McMillan JM, Jarvis JM. Mental health and students with 
disabilities: a review of literature. Aust J Guid Couns 2013; 
23: 236–51.
66 
Stallard P. Mental health prevention in UK classrooms: The FRIENDS 
anxiety prevention programme. Emot Behav Diﬃ  culties 2010; 15: 23–35.
67 
Manassis K. Anxiety prevention in schools. Lancet Psychiatry 
2014; 1: 164–65.
68 Johnson MH, George P, Armstrong MI, et al. Behavioral 
management for children and adolescents: assessing the evidence. 
Psychiatr Serv 2014; 65: 580–90.
69 Kavanagh J, Oliver S, Lorenc T, et al. School-based cognitive-
behavioural interventions: a systematic review of eﬀ ects and 
inequalities. Health Sociol Rev 2009; 18: 61–78.
70 
Miller LD, Shumka E, Baker H. Special applications: a review of 
cognitive behavioral mental health interventions for children in 
clinical and school-based settings. In: Cognitive behavioral therapy: 
applications, methods and outcomes. New York, USA: Nova Science 
Publishers, Inc, 2012: 1–36.
71 
Spence SH, Shortt AL. Research review: Can we justify the 
widespread dissemination of universal, school-based interventions 
for the prevention of depression among children and adolescents? 
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2007; 48: 526–42.
72 
Sawyer MG, Pfeiﬀ er S, Spence SH, et al. School-based prevention of 
depression: a randomised controlled study of the Beyondblue schools 
research initiative. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2010; 51: 199–209.
73 
Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. The eﬀ ects of a 
multiyear universal social-emotional learning program: The role of 
student and school characteristics. J Consult Clin Psychol 2010; 
78: 156–68.
74 
Merry SN, Hetrick S, Cox G, Brudevold-Iversen T, Bir J, 
McDowell H. Cochrane review: psychological and educational 
interventions for preventing depression in children and 
adolescents. Evid Based Child Health 2012; 7: 1409–683.
75 
Shochet IM, Dadds MR, Holland D, Whiteﬁ eld K, Harnett PH, 
Osgarby SM. The eﬃ  cacy of a universal school-based program to 
prevent adolescent depression. J Clin Child Psychol 2001; 30: 303–15.
76 
Lochman JE, Wells KC. The Coping Power program at the middle-
school transition: universal and indicated prevention eﬀ ects. 
Psychol Addict Behav 2002; 16 (suppl): S40–54.
386 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 1   October 2014
Series
77 
Farahmand FK, Grant KE, Polo AJ, Duﬀ y SN. School-based mental 
health and behavioral programs for low-income, urban youth: a 
systematic and meta-analytic review. Clin Psychol: Sci Pract 2011; 
18: 372–90.
78 
Tyrer R, Fazel M. School and community-based interventions for 
refugee and asylum seeking children: a systematic review. PLoS One 
2014; 2: e89359.
79 
Castellanos N, Conrod P. Brief interventions targeting personality 
risk factors for adolescent substance misuse reduce depression, 
panic and risk-taking behaviours. J Ment Health 2006; 15: 645–58.
80 Katz C, Bolton SL, Katz LY, Isaak C, Tilston-Jones T, Sareen J. A 
systematic review of school-based suicide prevention programs. 
Depress Anxiety 2013; 30: 1030–45.
81 
De Silva S, Parker A, Purcell R, Callahan P, Liu P, Hetrick S. 
Mapping the evidence of prevention and intervention studies for 
suicidal and self-harming behaviors in young people. Crisis 2013; 
34: 223–32.
82 Ay P, Save D. Adolescent depression: progress and future challenges 
in prevention-control activities. Marmara Med J 2004; 17: 47–52.
83 Mufson L, Dorta KP, Wickramaratne P, Nomura Y, Olfson M, 
Weissman MM. A randomized eﬀ ectiveness trial of interpersonal 
psychotherapy for depressed adolescents. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2004; 
61: 577–84.
84 
Vernberg EM, Roberts MC, Randall CJ, Biggs BK, Nyre JE, 
Jacobs AK. Intensive mental health services for children with 
serious emotional disturbances through a school-based, community-
oriented program. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry 2006; 11: 417–30.
85 McFarlane WR, Cook WL, Downing D, Verdi MB, Woodberry KA, 
Ruﬀ  A. Portland identiﬁ cation and early referral: a community-
based system for identifying and treating youths at high risk of 
psychosis. Psychiatr Serv 2010; 61: 512–15.
86 Hackett L, Theodosiou L, Bond C, Blackburn C, Spicer F, Lever R. 
Mental health needs in schools for emotional, behavioural and 
social diﬃ  culties. Br J Special Edu 2010; 37: 148–55.
87 
Schoenwald SK, Garland AF. A review of treatment adherence 
measurement methods. Psychol Assess 2013; 25: 146–56.
88 Neil AL, Christensen H. Australian school-based prevention and 
early intervention programs for anxiety and depression: a 
systematic review. Med J Aust 2007; 186: 305–08.
89 Richardson M, Moore D, Gweman-Jones R, et al. Non 
pharmacological interventions for Attention Deﬁ cit Hyperactivity 
Disorder (ADHD) delivered in school settings: systematic reviews 
of quantitative and qualitative research. http://www.nets.nihr.ac.uk/
projects/hta/1014002 (accessed Sep 21, 2014).
90 Bywater T, Sharples J. Eﬀ ective evidence-based interventions for 
emotional well-being: lessons for policy and practice. Res Pap Educ 
2012; 27: 389–408.
91 
Anderson R, Ukoumunne OC, Sayal K, et al. Cost-eﬀ ectiveness of 
classroom-based cognitive behaviour therapy in reducing symptoms 
of depression in adolescents: a trial-based analysis. 
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2014; online publication May 12. DOI: 
10.1111/jcpp.12248.
92 Collishaw S, Goodman R, Ford T, Rabe-Hesketh S, Pickles A. How 
far are associations between child, family and community factors 
and child psychopathology informant-speciﬁ c and informant-
general? J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2009; 50: 571–80.
93 Stallard P, Sayal K, Phillips R, et al. Classroom based cognitive 
behavioural therapy in reducing symptoms of depression in high 
risk adolescents: pragmatic cluster randomised controlled trial. 
BMJ 2012; 345: e6058.
94 
Spoth R, Guyll M, Redmond C, Greenberg M, Feinberg M. Six-year 
sustainability of evidence-based intervention implementation 
quality by community-university partnerships: the PROSPER study. 
Am J Comm Psychol 2011; 48: 412–25.
95 Blase K, Fixsen D. Core Intervention Components: Identifying and 
operationalizing what makes programs work. Washington DC: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, 2013.
96 Fixsen D, Naoom S, Blase K, Friedman R, Wallace F. 
Implementation research: a synthesis of the literature. Louis de la 
Parte Florida Mental Health Institute, National Implementation 
Research Network, Tampa, FL: University of South Florida, 2005.
97 
Sugai G, Stephan S. Considerations for a school mental health 
implementation framework. University of Oregon, Eugene: OSEP 
Technical Assistance Center on Positive Behavioral Interventions 
and Supports, 2013.
98 Domitrovich C, Greenberg MT. The study of implementation: current 
ﬁ ndings from eﬀ ective programs that prevent mental disorders in 
school-aged children. J Educ Psychol Cons 2000; 11: 193–221.
99 Durlak JA, DuPre EP. Implementation matters: a review of research 
on the inﬂ uence of implementation on program outcomes and the 
factors aﬀ ecting implementation. Am J Community Psychol 2008; 
41: 327–50.
100 Lendrum A, Humphrey N, Wigelsworth M. Social and emotional 
aspects of learning (SEAL) for secondary schools: implementation 
diﬃ  culties and their implications for school-based mental health 
promotion. Child Adolesc Ment Health 2013; 18: 158–64.
101 Hallfors D, Godette D. Will the ‘principles of eﬀ ectiveness’ improve 
prevention practice? Early ﬁ ndings from a diﬀ usion study. 
Health Educ Res 2002; 17: 461–70.
102 Gottfredson D, Gottfredson G. Quality of school-based prevention 
programs: results from a national survey. J Res Crime Delinq 2002; 
39: 3–35.
103 Rimm-Kaufman S, Fan X, Chiu Y, You W. The contibution of the 
responsive classroom approach on children’s achievement: results 
from a three year longitudinal study. J School Psychol 2007; 45: 401–21.
104 Allen JP, Pianta RC, Gregory A, Mikami AY, Lun J. An interaction-
based approach to enhancing secondary school instruction and 
student achievement. Science 2011; 333: 1034–37.
105 Rivers SE, Brackett MA, Reyes MR, Elbertson NA, Salovey P. 
Improving the social and emotional climate of classrooms: 
a clustered randomized controlled trial testing the RULER 
approach. Prev Sci 2013; 14: 77–87.
106 Domitrovich CE, Cortes RC, Greenberg MT. Improving young 
children’s social and emotional competence: a randomized trial of the 
preschool “PATHS” curriculum. J Primary Prevention 2007; 28: 67–91.
107 Mooney P, Ryan JB, Uhing BM, Reid R, Epstein MH. A review of 
self-management interventions targeting academic outcomes for 
students with emotional and behavioral disorders. 
J Behav Education 2005; 14: 203–21.
108 Becker KD, Bradshaw CP, Domitrovich C, Ialongo NS. Coaching 
teachers to improve implementation of the good behavior game. 
Adm Policy Ment Health 2013; 40: 482–93.
109 Reinke W, Stormont M, Webster-Stratton C, Newcomer L, 
Herman K. The incredible years teacher classroom management 
program: Using coaching to support generalization to real-world 
classroom settings. Psychol Schls 2012; 49: 416–28.
110 Hamre BK, Pianta RC. Classroom environments and developmental 
processes: conceptualization, measurement, & improvement. In: 
Meece J, Eccles J, eds. Handbook of research on schools, schooling 
and human development. New York: Routledge; 2010: 25–41.
111 Mikami AY, Gregory A, Allen JP, Pianta RC, Lun J. Eﬀ ects of a 
teacher professional development intervention on peer relationships 
in secondary classrooms. School Psych Rev 2011; 40: 367–85.
112 Raver CC, Jones SM, Li-Grining CP, Metzger M, Smallwood K, 
Sardin L. Improving preschool classroom processes: preliminary 
ﬁ ndings from a randomized trial implemented in Head Start 
settings. Early Child Res Q 2008; 63: 253–55.
113 Cappella E, Hamre BK, Kim HY, et al. Teacher consultation and 
coaching within mental health practice: classroom and child eﬀ ects 
in urban elementary schools. J Consult Clin Psych 2012; 80: 597–610.
114 Hamre BK, Pianta RC. Can instructional and emotional support in 
the ﬁ rst-grade classroom make a diﬀ erence for children at risk of 
school failure? Child Dev 2005; 76: 949–67.
115 Mashburn AJ, Pianta RC, Hamre BK, et al. Measures of classroom 
quality in prekindergarten and children’s development of academic, 
language, and social skills. Child Dev 2008; 79: 732–49.
116 Pianta RC, Allen JP. Building capacity for positive youth 
development in secondary schools: teachers and their interactions 
with students. In: Shinn M, Yoshikawa H, eds. Toward positive 
youth development: transforming schools and community 
programs. New York: Oxford University Press; 2008.
117 Tseng V, Seidman E. A systems framework for understanding social 
settings. Am J Community Psychol 2007; 39: 217–28.
118 Seidman E, Tseng V. Changing social settings: a framework for 
action. In: Aber M, Maton K, Seidman E, eds. Empowering settings 
and voices for social change. New York: Oxford University Press; 
2011: 12–37.
119 Catalano RF, Fagan AA, Gavin LE, et al. Worldwide application of 
prevention science in adolescent health. Lancet 2012; 379: 1653–64.
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Vol 1   October 2014 
387
Series
120 Schwean V, Rodger S. Children ﬁ rst: it’s time to change! Mental 
health promotion, prevention and treatment informed by public 
health, and resiliency approaches. Can J School Psychology 2013; 
28: 136–66.
121 Mendez LR, Ogg J, Loker T, Fefer S. Including parents in the 
continuum of school-based mental health services: a review of 
intervention program research from 1995 to 2010. J Appl Sch Psychol 
2013; 29: 1–36. 
122 Saldana L, Chamberlain P. Supporting implementation: the role of 
community development teams to build infrastructure. 
Am J Community Psychol 2012; 50: 334–46.
123 Aarons GA, Hurlburt M, Horwitz SM. Advancing a conceptual 
model of evidence-based practice implementation in public service 
sectors. Adm Policy Ment Health 2011; 38: 4–23.
124 Pearson M, Chilton R, Woods HB, et al. Implementing health 
promotion in schools: protocol for a realist systematic review of 
research and experience in the United Kingdom (UK). Syst Rev 
2012; 1: 48.
125 Nadeem E, Olin SS, Hill LC, Hoagwood KE, Horwitz SM. 
Understanding the components of quality improvement 
collaboratives: a systematic literature review. Milbank Q 2013; 
91: 354–94.
126 Palinkas LA, Holloway IW, Rice E, Fuentes D, Wu Q, 
Chamberlain P. Social networks and implementation of evidence-
based practices in public youth-serving systems: a mixed-methods 
study. Implement Sci 2011; 6: 113–23.
127 Nembhard IM. All teach, all learn, all improve?: The role of 
interorganizational learning in quality improvement collaboratives. 
Health Care Manage R 2012; 37: 154–64.
128 Wilson T, Berwick DM, Cleary P. What do collaborative 
improvement projects do? Experience from seven countries. 
Joint Comm J Qual Patient Safety 2004; 30 (Suppl 1): 25–33.
129 Nembhard IM. Learning and improving in quality improvement 
collaboratives: Which collaborative features do participants value 
most? Health Serv Res 2009; 44: 359–78.
130 Evans S. Mental health services in schools: utilization, eﬀ ectiveness, 
and consent. Clin Psychol Rev 1999; 19: 165–78.
131 Stein B, Jaycox L, Langley A, Kataoka SH, Wilkins WS, Wong M. 
Active parental consent for a school-based community violence 
screening: comparing distribution methods. J School Health 2007; 
77: 116–20.
132 Burke R, Stephan S. Contextual features of public schools in the 
United States as settings for mental health promotion. 
Adv Schl Mental Health Promotion 2008; 1: 52–60.
133 Hawkins JD, Oesterle S, Brown EC, Abbott RD, Catalano RF. Youth 
problem behaviors 8 years after implementing the communities 
that care prevention system: a community-randomized trial. 
JAMA Pediatr 2014; 168: 122–29.
134 Kreichman A, Salvador M, Adelsheim S. Expanding the vision: the 
strengths-based community-orientated child and adolescent 
psychiatrist working in schools. Child Adol Psychiatr Clin N Am 
2010; 19: 149–62.
135 Walter HJ, Berkovitz IH. Practice parameter for psychiatric 
consultation to schools. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2005; 
44: 1068–83.
136 Massachusetts General Hospital. School psychiatry program, 2010. 
www.schoolpsychiatry.org (accessed 23 July, 2014).
137 Patton GC, Ross DA, Santelli JS, Sawyer SM, Viner RM, Kleinert S. 
Next steps for adolescent health: a Lancet Commission. Lancet 2014; 
383: 385–86.
138 Sawyer SM, Aﬁ ﬁ  RA, Bearinger LH, et al. Adolescence: a 
foundation for future health. Lancet 2012; 379: 1630–40.
139 Wolfe I, Thompson M, Gill P, et al. Health services for children in 
western Europe. Lancet 2013; 381: 1224–34.
140 Snell T, Knapp M, Healey A, et al. Economic impact of childhood 
psychiatric disorder on public sector services in Britain: estimates 
from national survey data. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2013; 
54: 977–85.
141 Gray JA. The shift to personalised and population medicine. Lancet 
2013; 382: 200–01.
142 Viner RM, Ozer EM, Denny S, et al. Adolescence and the social 
determinants of health. Lancet 2012; 379: 1641–52.
143 Editorial. Mental health and wellbeing in children and adolescents. 
Lancet 2014; 383: 1183.
