Editorial

“Mental illness is like any other medical illness”: a
critical examination of the statement and its impact on
patient care and society
Ashok Malla, MBBS, MRCPsych; Ridha Joober, MD, PhD; Amparo Garcia, MA, MPPPA
The nature of mental illness has been the subject of passionate
discussion throughout history. In ancient Greece Plato,1,2 promoting a mentalist definition of mental illness, was the first to
coin the term “mental health,” which was conceived as reason
aided by temper and ruling over passion. At around the same
time, Hippocrates,3 taking a more physicalist approach, defined different mental conditions as a variety of imbalances between different kinds of “humours.” Griesinger4,5 almost 2 centuries ago was the first to state that “mental illness is brain
illness,” an expression that has provided a strong impetus to
the more recent medical conception of mental illness. The substantial progress accomplished in genomics and brain imaging
in the last few decades made biological psychiatry stronger
than ever and contributed to the reification of mental disorders
as illnesses of the brain. The almost exclusively biogenetic conceptual framework for understanding mental illness has acquired a hegemony that has influenced mental health practitioners while also influencing campaigns designed to improve
public attitudes toward the mentally ill. As a result, the statement “mental illness is like any other illness” has become almost axiomatic and, therefore, by definition it embodies an accepted truth not in need of a proof.
This view of mental illness is presented for better acceptance of the mentally ill by the public and of treatment by
those experiencing mental illness and is indeed based on accumulated, albeit limited, knowledge in the neurobiology of
mental disorders. However, anything that reaches axiomatic
proportions needs a serious examination. In this editorial we
examine the reasons underlying this perspective, its consequences and the evidence to support or refute its continued
justification. We then present a position that we believe best
fits the current state of knowledge and is closest to clinical
­realities and public perceptions of mental illnesses.

What does the statement actually imply?
The statement that “mental illness is like any other medical
illness” implies that mental illness has a biological basis just
like other medical illnesses and should be treated in the public’s eye in a similar manner. The purpose of this article is not
to present a philosophical or ideological argument in favour
of or against a biological basis explaining mental illness, but
rather to examine the clinical and public utility of presenting
a dominant neurobiological model of mental illness to patients, their families and the public at large.

Illness, pathophysiology and the “self’’
To understand the justification of equating mental and medical
disorders, a comparison often made between type 2 diabetes
and mental disorders, especially schizophrenia, other psychoses
and depression, is worth examining in some detail. Diabetes, although very complex, is understood as the result of dysfunctional glucose metabolism related to absolute or relative insufficiency of insulin signalling. This dysfunctional metabolism is
the consequence of endogenous predispositions, such as hereditary diathesis, and environmental factors, including personal
choices, such as poor diet and sedentary life style. Therefore, by
improving glucose metabolism, either through medication, insulin replacement or changes in lifestyle, positive health outcomes can be expected. Diabetes is diagnosed by confirming
high levels of fasting glucose and other related biochemical
markers of glucose metabolism. Further, the cascade of its effects on other systems (e.g., cardiovascular, central nervous system) are, or could be, well explained on the basis of physiologic
mechanisms. They can also be prevented/treated by better and
early control of diabetes. All through this, however, the patient

Editors’ note: The ideas expressed in this editorial are not necessarily those of the journal. Importantly, JPN continues to focus on publishing
“papers at the intersection of psychiatry and neuroscience that advance our understanding of the neural mechanisms involved in the etiology
and treatment of psychiatric disorders.”

Correspondence to: A. Malla, Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montréal, Que., Canada; ashok.malla@mcgill.ca
DOI: 10.1503/jpn.150099
©2015 8872147 Canada Inc.

J Psychiatry Neurosci 2015;40(3)

147

Malla et al.

is aware of the nature of his or her problems, including personal
choices, and diabetes generally does not affect his or her day-today thinking, behaviour or perception. Except for mental health
complications due to neurologic illnesses (e.g., delirium in the
context of severe metabolic complications, depression as a consequence of awareness of the life and death implication of the
disorder, abnormal perceptions in the case of some neurologic
conditions), it can be stated that somatic illnesses, such as dia­
betes do not usually alter the core self of a person substantially.
More importantly, the model of attribution presented to the patient is congruent with the scientific “facts,” thereby making it
easier for the person as well as society to accept the condition.
Mental disorders, on the other hand, affect the very core of
one’s being through a range of experiences and phenomena of
varying severity that alter the individual’s thinking, perception
and consciousness about the self, others and the world. This is
seen to an extreme degree with more serious mental disorders,
such as psychoses and bipolar disorders, but to a lesser albeit
significant degree with anxiety, mood, eating and other psychiatric disorders. Emotion, perception, thought and action are the
essence of human identity and the concept of “self,” and these
are the prime domains altered in mental disorders. The precise
definition of what constitutes the self and whether the location
of a state of self is a material reality in the brain, its form and the
brain-related factors that influence it are deeply philosophical issues,6,7 but not the subject of this editorial. Suffice it to say that
factors involved in increasing the risk for mental disorders are
endogenous (genetics is recognized as a major contributor to
most mental disorders) as well as environmental, much like
most medical disorders. Psychological deprivation and trauma,
social defeat and isolation, poverty and poor family environment are but some of the environmental factors that have been
reported to increase the risk for mental disorders. In addition to
changes at the physiologic level, common to somatic and mental
disorders the latter encompass changes in one’s definition of
“self,” and are not situated outside the “self.” It can even be argued that in the absence of any substantiated biological marker
for mental disorders (only 1 has been included in the recent
DSM-5: orexin change in narcolepsy),8 the hallmark defining
features of mental disorders, at least for now, remain the
changes in how the patients feel, think and act and how these
changes affect their relation to themselves and to others.
As a first corollary of this definition, contrary to medical conditions where restoring dysfunctional physiologic mechanisms
is the main target of therapeutic interventions, this is only 1 part
of the therapeutic interventions for mental disorders. The primary focus of therapeutic interventions in mental disorders is
helping the patient to feel better and interact more adaptively
with his or her social and physical environments. Although
there is little doubt that all medical conditions require psychological attention, mental health interventions focus primarily on
achieving a positive change in feeling, self-esteem, mood, perceptions, thoughts and action — all changes in the “self” that are
not primarily targeted in the treatment of medical conditions.
Different models of psychological and social interventions are
the main ingredients for these desired changes in the self.
A second corollary of this definition is the fact that mental
health is very laden with values, not because scientific fac-

148

tors are lacking, but because values become of the utmost
importance — more so than for medical disorders — when
we deal with the self and its restoration. While somatic illnesses such as diabetes are primarily defined and shaped by
biologically discernible facts, values do play a certain role
but do not define the disorder. Societal and personal values
are important in the treatment of most medical disorders,
but acquire paramount importance in the case of mental
disorders. Societal and cultural values even define variations in diagnoses over time and across geographic locations. Compulsory treatments, a particularity in the mental
health field, are a strong testimony of how mental health
can interfere with the self and how the personal values of
the patient can clash with the societal values, thus necessitating legal, value-laden mitigation.

Neurobiology and experience of mental illness
Advances in neurosciences have surely given us much better
biological mechanistic explanations of many of the uniquely
human cognitive, emotional and conative functions, such as
memory, thinking, perception, mood and action. This know­
ledge has informed us that many mental illnesses derive their
vulnerability from underlying biological variations. However,
we are far from being able to explain in neurobiological terms
many of the behaviours and experiences that constitute the
core presentations of mental disorders. Even if neurobiology
one day were to provide better explanations of the workings of
the brain, more elaborately explain the role of genes in increasing the risk for mental illness and the mechanisms behind
complex human behaviour, one would still need to understand the experiences of patients with different forms of mental illness in psychological terms, as recently described by
Kendler9 so eloquently. By equating mental illness with any
medical illness and, therefore, situating it in an organ within
the human biology and not recognizing its unique nature in
the way it affects the “self” cannot be justified on the basis of
current state of knowledge nor may it serve our patients and
society well, as we explain in the rest of this editorial.

Mental illness and the utility of explanatory
models
Indeed, it is envisaged that putting mental illness on the
same footing as medical illness, society will understand it
better and not react negatively toward those with mental illnesses. It is hoped that as a result those with mental illness
may face less social stigma — a major obstacle to people
seeking and/or receiving help — and reducing stigma may
help individuals regain eventual acceptance by society as
productive members. Interestingly, the public’s explanatory
models of mental illness do not follow this narrative and, on
the contrary, the public have multiple models of explaining
mental illness varying across cultures and times.
One needs to ask the pragmatic question of whether the
strategy of using a biogenetic model of mental illness and
equating it with medical illness has actually helped. There
are 2 areas worthy of examination in this regard.

J Psychiatry Neurosci 2015;40(3)

“Mental illness is like any other medical illness”

Explanatory models, stigma and society
The first is to examine the effect of the statement, “mental illness
is like any other medical illness,” on social stigma toward
­people with mental illness. As indicated previously, implicit in
the axiomatic statement is a primarily biological origin of the behaviour and suffering that characterize mental illness. Let us examine the evidence in this regard. In the last decade or 2, bio­
genetic attribution of all mental disorders, having acquired a
hegemoneous status10 has been used primarily to inform campaigns for reducing stigma and promoting better acceptance of
mental illness and the people with mental illnesses by society.11,12 Several well-conducted studies have concluded, almost
uniformly, that this strategy has not only not worked, but also
may have worsened public attitudes and behaviour toward
those with mental illnesses. Investigations of stigma have
shown that those who consider mental disorders as primarily
attributable to biological forces, just like other medical disorders,
while absolving the mentally ill person of responsibility for their
behaviour and actions, tend to feel less optimistic about their
ability to get better and function well, are less accepting of them
and feel less positively toward them.13–16 In a review of the literature related to the concept of mental illness being like any other
illness, Read and colleagues17 reported that biogenetic causal
theories and diagnostic labelling as illness are both positively related to perceptions of dangerousness and unpredictability and
to fear of and desire for social distance. The attitudes investigated in these studies are reflected in individuals’ responses to
whether they would live next door to, socialize or make friends
with or have a close relative get married to a person described
as being mentally ill. There is also evidence to suggest that biogenetic explanatory models may have negative consequences
for those with mental illness in terms of their implicit self concept and explicit attitudes, such as fear.18 Further, campaigns to
reduce stigma that encourage people to think about mental illness as simply another form of medical illness have produced
results that show effects to the contrary. For example, a recent
study showed that over a 10-year period of deliberate use of the
biogenetic explanatory model for campaigning to reduce stigma
has resulted in worsening of most, if not all, aspects of public
­attitudes toward individuals with mental illnesses.19,20 The
strength of these perhaps counterintuitive findings comes from
the fact that these studies were adequately designed, well
­powered and, most importantly, replicated in several countries
(e.g., United States, Britain, Germany) with very similar results.
It is acknowledged that these relatively negative attitudes may
be particularly stronger in relation to certain forms of mental illness (e.g., psychosis, manic depressive illness) and addictions.

Explanatory models of mental illness and the mentally ill person
Another domain — perhaps the most important — of examination is the individual with mental illness. In clinical practice, telling patients that their presenting mental illness is like any other
medical illness may initially reassure some and assist them in
accepting to take medication, especially during the distressing
acute phases of a serious mental disorder. They or their families
may welcome a simple explanation for encouraging them to ac-

cept treatment, which in many cases includes medication. While
this strategy can achieve something very important in acute
­crisis-like situations, it may become problematic, if persistent
over time, in getting individuals to accept other highly effective
psychological and social treatments. These latter interventions
are highly effective and considerably less noxious than often less
effective medications for some forms of mental illness, such as
mild to moderate depression, anxiety and eating disorders, and
emotional dysregulation associated with several long-standing
mental illnesses. Even in the most serious mental disorders,
such as psychotic, bipolar and severe major depressive disorders, where medications are invariably an essential part of treatment, psychological and social therapeutic interventions are the
essential bridge between pharmacological interventions during
the acute crises and the need for their sustained use in the long
term while at the same time achieving the essential goals of
­relief of internal distress, restoration of self and a return to productive social and working lives.
Furthermore, presenting mental illness as any other medical
illness often implies a medical treatment (medication in most
cases) as the dominant treatment strategy. Patients’ rejection of
the treating clinician’s medical illness model is generally described as lack of insight and starts the cycle of nonadherence to
medication, which then translates into nonadherence to treatment. In reality, if patients and families are allowed to articulate
their attributional models, given credit for their “experiential
knowledge” and encouraged to enter into a dialogue with the
treating clinician, it is more likely there will be some consensus
on acceptance of recommended treatment. This may prevent the
cycle of disengagement and decline in the course that follows.

What needs to be done?
In clinical practice, if we are to take seriously the multidimensional goals of providing mental health services, as articulated by those seeking and receiving help for mental illness,
clinicians have to work within an attributional model that
makes sense to the person receiving service, that can be supported by sound argument and evidence and that provides a
framework within which those receiving service and those
providing it can share a common language. Such a framework will need to include the biogenetic model of attribution
of mental illness as 1 of several parallel and equally authentic
social, psychological, environmental and cultural models offered by service providers and researchers (acquired know­
ledge) as well as those who experience mental illness (ex­
periential knowledge). There is a need to create a common
language in order to come to an understanding of the person’s experience and to promote such an understanding
among the public at large. Denying the special nature of
mental illness is unlikely to achieve these important goals.
Some recent developments, such as the promotion of a recovery model21–23 and the early intervention movement,24,25 may
hold more promise in improving both the quality of care and
possibly involvement of and improvement in public attitudes.
The former has emerged from experiential knowledge and advocacy from service users, supported later by sound qualitative
research, whereas the latter has emerged from a combination of

J Psychiatry Neurosci 2015;40(3)

149

Malla et al.

a shift in philosophy of delivery of care on the part of service
providers, parallel generation of evidence of its effectiveness26,27
and greater acceptance by service users and their families, who
have now joined the movement as advocates. A third emerging
movement, the concept of positive mental health,28,29 may prove
to be effective in combating the negative image of mental illness.
This movement promotes and is based on human resilience and
positive aspects of the experience of mental illness. There is a
burgeoning literature emerging in this field, which may balance
the rather deterministic, deficit oriented and largely pessimistic
miasma created by using an exclusively biogenetic model to explain mental disorders.

3.

Conclusion and recommendations

10.

Simply seeking an axiom of “mental illness is like any other
medical illness” is at best simplifying a complex human problem and at worst doing a major disservice to patients, their fam­
ilies and the mental health field. Our dialogue should incor­
porate the general complexity of human thinking, behaviour,
memories and the idea of self and consciousness, including
knowledge emerging from sophisticated biogenetic and social
science research while attending to the specific complexities that
each of us as human beings carry as part of our life stories. That
is true for those receiving and those providing services.
We therefore argue that we should continue to have a social
and a professional conversation where we find a proper place
for neurobiology, social, cultural and environmental forces, personal histories and the uniqueness of each individual when trying to understand, explain and treat mental disorders while
avoiding a simplistic reductionism that may be perceived at best
as patronizing but ultimately harmful, even though the intentions may be noble. We propose that future antistigma campaigns should give up the axiom of “mental illness is like any
other medical illness” and instead present the complex and
multi­faceted explanations of mental illness as unique along with
the positive aspects as discussed here. These campaigns need to
be informed not only by the acquired knowledge of service providers and scientists but equally by the experiential knowledge
from service users and their families, taking into consideration
new knowledge emerging from fields of recovery, early intervention and positive mental health. For clinicians, it would be
equally important to embrace explanatory models of mental illness that are based on evidence in science and to include bio­
genetic, social and cultural models as well as those told to them
by the very people they are trying to serve.