REVIEW PAPER
School-Based Screening: A Population-Based Approach to Inform
and Monitor Children’s Mental Health Needs
Erin Dowdy • Kristin Ritchey • R. W. Kamphaus
Published online: 27 April 2010
 The Author(s) 2010. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract
School-based mental health professionals often
conduct assessments and provide interventions on an
individual basis to students with signiﬁcant needs. How-
ever, due to increasingly limited resources and continuing
high levels of need, a shift in service delivery is warranted.
Efforts to move school psychological services from reac-
tive and individual, to preventive and universal are ongo-
ing. To further service delivery change, school-based
mental health professionals can engage in systematic
periodic mental health screening of all children. This arti-
cle will (a) discuss screening for risk of emotional and
behavior problems from a population-based approach,
(b) describe how screening data can identify and moni-
tor the needs of students, schools, and communities, and
(c) provide future directions for screening practices. As
continued changes to service delivery are imminent,
information on how to utilize school-based screening data
will be particularly valuable to mental health professionals
working with or within schools.
Keywords
Screening  Assessment  Service delivery
models  Response to intervention  Mental health
School psychology is largely operating under a Refer-Test-
Place model of service delivery, in which the students are
referred to a school psychologist who assesses their need
for special education or related services (Cash and Nealis
2004). Service delivery is typically individually focused in
case conceptualization as well as intervention, and relies on
providing direct services for students at the highest level of
risk. In particular, assessment has occurred on a student-
by-student basis whereby each student is evaluated sepa-
rately for potential risks and resources and to determine
eligibility for services. In this model, school psychologists’
are inefﬁciently being utilized to provide services primarily
to a small group of students, those at the highest level of
risk, and to serve as gatekeepers to special education
(Kleiver and Cash 2005).
Although this service delivery approach is well-inten-
tioned, it is unlikely that focusing on assessment and
symptom reduction on an individual basis will yield
meaningful improvement within a population. Not sur-
prisingly, this individual-focused approach has thus far
failed to signiﬁcantly decrease rates of mental illness, with
estimates suggesting that approximately 20% of children in
the United States are experiencing mental, emotional, or
behavioral symptoms that would qualify them for a psy-
chiatric diagnosis in any given year (Costello et al. 2003).
Furthermore, current estimates suggest that a majority of
these children and adolescents at risk for emotional and
behavioral problems are both unidentiﬁed and untreated
(Kataoka et al. 2002; Mills et al. 2006). The high rates of
children with unmet mental health needs, coupled with the
limited resources that are available (Nastasi 2004), neces-
sitate a change in the way services are provided.
For quite some time, an alternative service delivery
approach, based on a public health model of service
delivery, has been recommended for the treatment of
E. Dowdy (&)  K. Ritchey
Gevirtz Graduate School of Education, Department
of Counseling, Clinical, and School Psychology, University
of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA
e-mail: edowdy@education.ucsb.edu
R. W. Kamphaus
College of Education, Georgia State University,
Atlanta, GA, USA
e-mail: edurwk@langate.gsu.edu
123
School Mental Health (2010) 2:166–176
DOI 10.1007/s12310-010-9036-3
emotional and behavioral disorders within schools (Kleiver
and Cash 2005; Short 2003). In short, a public health
framework differs from traditional service delivery models
primarily in the explicit focus on society, as opposed to any
one individual, as the population of interest and its focus on
prevention, as opposed to intervention. This approach
requires that individuals other than those solely at the
highest level of risk receive attention (Doll and Cummings
2008b). The historical justiﬁcation and implicit assumption
of the public health model is that illness in one person may
threaten the health of others. Theoretically, this perspective
is well aligned with ecological systems perspectives, as
proposed by Bronfenbrenner (1979), in which individuals
and systems are mutually inﬂuential. Within an ecological
framework, each student is conceptually at the center of a
series of concentric circles, which represent increasingly
expanding, mutually inﬂuential systems; all of these over-
lapping systems ultimately affect the student’s well-being, and
vice versa. Illness in any one person may impact another, but
also the broader systems, as well. For lasting impact, change
must occur at a level broader than just within an individual.
To provide further guidance on how to make broad-based
changes to school-based service delivery, the principals of
public health can be likened to the ecological perspective
already adopted by many school-based practitioners.
Transforming Service Delivery within Schools
Considering the substantial research base conﬁrming that
schools are often the major providers of mental health
services for youth (Burns et al. 1995), schools are an ideal
context for transforming mental health services based on a
public health framework (Doll and Cummings 2008b).
Indeed, this framework has provided ‘‘a roadmap for the
design and development of population-based perspectives
on school mental health’’ (Doll and Cummings, p. 7). As
proposed by Nastasi (2004), school-based mental health
practitioners have the opportunity to undertake a unique
role in integrating the goals of public health into mental
health service delivery. This integration requires a para-
digm shift in service delivery from reactive and individual,
to preventive and universal in scope. Accordingly, all
individuals stand to beneﬁt by creating the potential for
improvement at the population level as well by reducing
the epidemiology of mental health problems and the
functional impairment associated with them.
Discussions in favor of a transformation toward a pop-
ulation-based approach within schools have been ongoing
for at least the past decade with strong endorsements
emanating from the 2002 Multisite Conference on the
Future of School Psychology (Harrison et al. 2004). Prac-
tical recommendations for a population-based service
delivery model have taken the form of a three-tiered
approach. Similar to the response to intervention (RtI)
movement of identifying and assisting children with aca-
demic needs, a three-tiered approach has been recom-
mended to meet children’s emotional and behavioral needs,
as well (Osher et al. 2004). In this approach, universal
services are provided to all youth through a school or
district-wide implementation; selected or targeted services
are provided to youth who are deemed at-risk; and indi-
cated or intensive interventions are targeted for youth
demonstrating the greatest level of need or impairment
(Durlak 1997). Although population-based approaches are
sometimes inaccurately viewed as solely providing uni-
versal, or tier one, strategies, the goals of population-based
services clearly encompass universal, selected, and indi-
cated services to promote the psychological well-being and
health of all students (Doll and Cummings 2008b).
The speciﬁc work of applying public health principals to
school-based service delivery within a three-tiered approach
has also begun. Doll and Cummings (2008a) applied ten
essential public health services, as delineated by the Institute
of Medicine, to school mental health services. One of these
essential services is to monitor the health status of a popu-
lation to identify what health problems that community faces
(Institute of Medicine 1988). A critical ﬁrst step is to identify
the characteristics of the problem and determine the mental
health status of the population. Within schools, this typically
takes the form of monitoring students’ social-emotional,
relational, and academic competence (Doll and Cummings
2008b).
Current Approaches to Mental Health Monitoring
Physical health indicators, such as vision and hearing, are
often assessed and monitored on an individual basis through
the use of a school nurse within schools. Similarly, mental
health indicators have been individually assessed by a quali-
ﬁed mental health professional and then progress has been
monitored through the use of treatment goals as outlined in a
student’s individualized education plan (IEP). This current
practice of problem identiﬁcation and monitoring at the
individual level is decidedly limited in its utility and scope.
Individual-based assessment is insufﬁcient for identify-
ing and monitoring the mental health status of a population
of students for several reasons. First, conducting mental
health assessments on an individual by individual is cost-
prohibitive, both in terms of time and personnel resources.
The limited resources available make it difﬁcult to assess all
individuals within a population to garner population-based
information. Additionally, the information gathered from
individual-based assessment is inadequate for treatment
planning. While the interventions for vision or hearing
School Mental Health (2010) 2:166–176
167
123
problems are most effective on an individual-basis (i.e.
providing a student with glasses or a hearing aid), a wide
body of research speaks to the value of providing school-
wide positive behavior supports (PBS) to support student’s
social/emotional development (e.g. Hunter 2003; Horner
et al. 2002). In order for school-wide efforts to be appro-
priately tailored to the needs of the school, comprehensive
data on the functioning of an entire body of students, rather
than just a few individuals, is needed.
Unfortunately, schools have few resources to obtain
systematic and evidence-based data to identify and monitor
the mental health needs of a population of students (Short
and Strein 2008). Recognizing this dearth of information
available and the lack of empirical evidence on effective
ways to monitor the mental health functioning of a popu-
lation, it is logical and imperative that schools work with
existing resources. One resource that is available to many
schools is The Center for Disease Control’s Youth Risk
Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS), an example of a
population-based problem identiﬁcation instrument. This
survey of secondary students provides information about
behaviors that pose a health risk to students, such as sub-
stance use, sexual activity, violence-related behaviors (e.g.
bullying, physical abuse, use of weapons), and body weight
(e.g. obesity, dieting, eating disorders). The survey also
asks direct questions pertaining to sadness, hopelessness,
suicidal ideation, and suicidal intent, providing insight into
the mental health functioning of students. For example,
students are asked, ‘‘During the past 12 months, did you
ever feel so sad or hopeless almost every day for 2 weeks
or more in a row that you stopped doing some usual
activities?’’
School-based
mental
health
professionals
could utilize this information that is available to them to
begin to monitor the mental health needs of students
(Dowdy et al. 2010). For example, data from the YRBSS or
similar surveys (such as the California Healthy Kids Sur-
vey, see www.wested.org/hks) can be used to identify the
prevalence of certain mental health indicators, such as
depression or behavioral problems, across primary and
secondary students. This information can be compared
across local, state, and national levels to begin to assist
with problem identiﬁcation.
Data from the YRBSS can also be analyzed across time
points to provide some indication of overall and within-
cohort trends. Since the YRBSS is given biannually, stu-
dents that are initially surveyed in the 9th grade will be
re-assessed in the 11th grade, and those assessed in 10th
grade will be surveyed again during 12th grade (See
Fig. 1). For example, from 2003 to 2005, the students who
reported seriously considering suicide decreased among
both cohorts sampled; students that advanced from 9th to
11th grade decreased from 20.8 to 16.8% and students that
advanced from 10th to 12th decreased from 19.0.9 to
14.8%. This continuity of respondents can provide infor-
mation regarding changes among cohorts across time,
which may serve as an indicator of whether the population-
based services being employed are effective.
In addition to grade level reports, data from the YRBSS
and other similar surveys can also be aggregated by gender,
ethnicity, and school. Although the identity of speciﬁc
students is not accessible, this information still provides a
method for problem identiﬁcation and monitoring at the
school,
district,
and
community
levels.
Information
obtained from the YRBSS can be useful to monitor the
prevalence of certain problems, measure progress toward
achieving health objectives, assess trends in health-risk
behaviors, and evaluate the impact of interventions at the
national, state, and local level (Kann 2001).
However, the extensive limitations of the YRBSS, one
of the few sources of population-based data, further high-
light the need for additional sources of information on the
mental health functioning of students. In particular, the
anonymous nature of these surveys, biannual administra-
tion schedule, limitations in psychometric properties, and
the lack of ﬂexibility in content limit their scope in
applicability for individuals and schools. Additionally,
according to the most recent publicly posted (2007) data,
only 22 sites, all of which were large, mostly urban
counties or cities, had a 60% or greater response rate to the
YRBSS, thus yielding useable data (see www.cdc.gov/
HealthyYouth/yrbs.brief.htm). Overall, the YRBSS col-
lects a trivial amount of information which can provide
insight into the mental health functioning of students.
Information on the number of students experiencing sig-
niﬁcant feelings of sadness or thoughts of suicide can be
easily obtained; however, it is impossible to discern
information regarding a host of other important emotional
and behavioral concerns, such as inattention, hyperactivity,
or anxiety. While data from the YRBSS can provide some
Survey Year
Grade 9
Grade 11
Grade 10
Grade 12
1999
18.1
21.9
2001
16.9
16.4
18.3
15.5
2003
20.8
18.9
19.0
16.4
2005
17.9
16.8
17.3
14.8
Fig. 1 Example of longitudinal population-based monitoring. Per-
centage of students by grade level and survey cohort year who
seriously considered suicide during the 12 months before the survey
from Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance Survey 1999–2005. Survey
results from 1999 (Kann 2001), 2001 (Gruenbaum et al. 2002), 2003
(Gruenbaum et al. 2004), and 2005 (Eaton et al. 2006) Youth Risk
Behavior Surveillance Summaries
168
School Mental Health (2010) 2:166–176
123
minimal data that can be useful in the absence of other
data, additional sources of information are needed to pro-
vide a more comprehensive picture of the mental health
functioning of students.
Since data that speciﬁcally identify and monitor the
mental health status of a population are limited, popula-
tion-based mental health information is often collected
through analysis of proxy variables. For example, exam-
ining rates of ofﬁce discipline referrals or juvenile justice
involvement provides an indirect link, as a higher inci-
dence of mental health problems has been observed among
those involved in the juvenile justice systems (Drerup et al.
2008). Similarly, an examination of census statistics for
crime or substance abuse provides an indicator of envi-
ronmental risk but little speciﬁc information on mental
health rates of students. The limited data available, and
little guidance on how to collect population-based infor-
mation, can lead to stagnation and a continued reliance on
individually based problem identiﬁcation and monitoring.
Population-Based Assessment
A practical approach to population-based problem identi-
ﬁcation and monitoring has been proposed by Short and
Strein (2008) in which behavioral and social epidemio-
logical techniques are utilized. In this approach, objective
information about a condition is collected (descriptive
epidemiology) and built upon to examine the possible
causes and inﬂuences on the condition in a population
(analytic epidemiology). For example, information about
the number and characteristics (age, school, gender, SES)
of students with mental health concerns would be collected
to calculate the incidence and prevalence rate of the
problem. Then, hypotheses would be generated and tested
to explain what might be causing or exacerbating the
mental health problem (Short and Strein 2008).
A comprehensive service delivery system depending on
regular data collection through universal screening could
provide direct information allowing for both problem identi-
ﬁcation and monitoring. School-based screening has been
proposed as one method for early identiﬁcation of both aca-
demic (VanDerHeyden et al. 2007) and mental health (Levitt
et al. 2007) problems, and the process of universally screening
within a school as a part of a RtI program to determine risk
status and early intervention needs is gaining momentum. By
systematically engaging in periodic mental health screening
of all children in schools (Hill et al. 2004), school-based
mental health professionals can shift their focus away from
solely providing indicated services to providing more popu-
lation-based, ultimately preventive, services.
A multiple gating screening system ﬁts well within the
three-tiered model or RtI program. Initially, all children
within a school are screened to identify risk factors (uni-
versal) and those children who screen positively as being at
risk are provided a more in-depth assessment to determine
their true risk status (selected). Finally, children who are
deemed to be at-risk are provided with a comprehensive,
individualized assessment (indicated) to determine pre-
cisely what their needs are. Accompanying interventions
can be provided at any level. For example, suppose that
following a universal screening it is found that 72% of the
students in a classroom had signiﬁcant symptoms of anx-
iety. This information suggests that a universal approach
toward prevention and intervention of anxiety is the most
appropriate level of intervention. Alternatively, if only two
children in the classroom were screened as being at the
highest level of risk, indicated services should be provided
to those students. A direct and efﬁcient utilization of
resources can be easily achieved through the use of
screening data to inform decisions about service provision.
The process of universally screening for academic
concerns, particularly within the area of reading assess-
ment, is becoming well-recognized and increasingly uti-
lized. For example, the Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early
Literacy Skills (DIBELS; Good and Kaminski 2002) is
routinely utilized to screen for early literacy problems and
monitor the development of early literacy skills (Brunsman
2003). School psychologists and other educational profes-
sionals have witnessed the value of having a systematic and
proactive process in place to identify and provide early
interventions to students in need. However, the process of
systematic screening for emotional and behavioral prob-
lems has lagged behind, with estimates suggesting that less
than 2% of schools currently utilize a systematic screening
process to identify risk for mental health problems (Romer
and McIntosh 2005). This lack of implementation within
schools has been hypothesized to be due to a variety of
factors including: the lack of technically adequate and
practical screening measures (DiStefano and Kamphaus
2007); high ﬁnancial and personnel costs (Romer and
McIntosh); unrecognized social signiﬁcance and impor-
tance of the screening by the school personnel (Lane and
Beebe-Frankenberger
2004);
and
societal
stigma
for
screening of mental health problems and the schools role in
addressing these mental health needs (Carter et al. 2004).
However, a shift in focus toward the early identiﬁcation
of mental health problems (Mills et al. 2006), coupled with
advances in early identiﬁcation made possible through
recent improvements in screening technologies (Levitt
et al. 2007), have the potential to be a catalyst for change in
the process of screening for mental health. In fact, school
personnel have begun to react favorably to the increasing
focus on early identiﬁcation by endorsing a variety of large
scale screening approaches to screen children for mental
health risk status (Glover and Albers 2007).
School Mental Health (2010) 2:166–176
169
123
Universal Screening for Population-Based Problem
Identiﬁcation and Monitoring
Universally screening for emotional and behavioral prob-
lems affords the unique opportunity to collect a wide array
of information from an entire population, which can be
used for population-based problem identiﬁcation and
monitoring. Districts or local communities engaging in a
universal screening program can aggregate the data and
make comparisons across a number of groups or systems
within that larger context to determine where signiﬁcant
problems and strengths exist. This system of coordinated
data collection and analysis would allow for multiple
agencies (e.g. schools, districts, communities) to gain a
‘‘portrait of the collective mental health of all students
enrolled in a school or district’’ (Doll and Cummings
2008a, p. 1333). The scope of the problem and objective
information about the condition can be documented. By
gathering descriptive epidemiological information, analytic
epidemiological techniques, in which the possible causes
and inﬂuences of the problem are sought and estimated,
can be employed.
A comprehensive population-based approach would also
allow for screening data to be used as a method to monitor
a school’s mental health needs and progress. Screening
data collected at different time points can be analyzed for
trends across time to determine the changing prevalence
and incidence of mental health problems. This goal can be
accomplished using the same techniques mentioned pre-
viously when discussing the YRBSS (see Fig. 1). Moni-
toring the prevalence and incidence of youth problem
behaviors has the potential to inform the selection of
optimal prevention practices (Biglan et al. 2003), and
sufﬁcient epidemiological data can allow for schools to
prioritize and direct resources into the prevention or
intervention efforts that are most needed. Over time,
monitoring the ﬂuctuations in problem prevalence can
provide information on the effectiveness of the interven-
tions and services implemented and guide the planning of
additional services, as needed.
Currently, the utility of this population-based approach
to problem identiﬁcation and monitoring is being investi-
gated in one community in California; this community
consists of a consortium of four school districts. These
school districts recently received a federal grant as part of
the Safe Schools/Healthy Students initiative (SSHS; see
www.sshs.samhsa.gov for more information), designed to
fund programs for children and communities in ﬁve major
domains of functioning: school safety and violence pre-
vention;
alcohol
and
other drug
prevention;
student
behavioral, emotional, and social supports; mental health
services; and early childhood social and emotional learning
programs. In the initial problem identiﬁcation stage to
determine existing problems and resources, the school
districts universally administered a brief, behavioral and
emotional screener. Working within existing structures, the
schools co-administered a screener during a federally
mandated administration of the California healthy kids
survey (CHKS). Through this population-based screening,
these school districts will be well-positioned to identify the
behavioral and emotional functioning of the students
within the entire community. Schools can individually
identify the certain characteristics of the students within
their schools; districts can combine school data to discuss
the district’s functioning; and the community can gather
information from the multiple, surrounding districts to get a
sense of the population’s mental health functioning.
Additionally,
when
the
population-based
assessment,
including a social-emotional screener, is re-administered
the schools will be able to monitor the status of the whole
population. This may prove to be an efﬁcient way to gauge
the effectiveness of the SSHS collaborative designed to
improve the mental health functioning of students within
an entire community.
Key Considerations for School-Based Screening
If universal screening data with similar indicators of
functioning is collected by a variety of schools and districts
throughout the community, leading to the creation of local
norms, insight can easily be gleaned into the particular
level of interventions needed. The next section outlines the
importance of a collaborative, comprehensive approach to
screening with a priori decisions made regarding the con-
structs of interest.
Constructs of Interest
First and foremost, a decision has to be made about the
relevant constructs to assess. For example, it may be per-
tinent for a school to screen as part of the assessment of
mental health disorders (as deﬁned by the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act, or another system), or screen
for the risk of developing behavioral and emotional prob-
lems, or both. The former mandates the use of discrete
symptom measures and the latter requires measures of
behavioral and emotional adjustment in general, ranging
from frank psychopathology to the presence of more
problems than are typical but yet remain below a diagnostic
threshold. It is possible, however, to implement a multi-
gate screening procedure that provides both risk assessment
and diagnostic assessment through the same system
simultaneously. Furthermore, an essential a priori decision
about
whether
to
collect
information
about
the
170
School Mental Health (2010) 2:166–176
123
epidemiology of mental health disorders, in addition to the
assessment of behavioral and emotional risk in a popula-
tion, should be made.
While it is feasible to collect information on both risk
and disorders prevalent within a population, additional
resources would be needed to collect both. As screening is
intended to be a quick, time-efﬁcient process it is logical to
screen only for the information that is most relevant and
that could lead to efﬁcient resource allocation. The popu-
lation-based model espoused in this work is consistent with
screening for risk, as opposed to screening for disorders, in
order to engage in tier one and tier two early intervention
and secondary prevention services. Indeed, identifying and
preventing problems before they have fully developed is a
cost-effective and efﬁcient method of service delivery
(Levitt et al. 2007). Furthermore, screening for a variety of
different problems (e.g. externalizing, internalizing, school
problems) using broad measures of maladjustment will
likely be more beneﬁcial, efﬁcient, and useful in popula-
tion-based approaches when compared to screeners that
focus speciﬁcally on one disorder (e.g. depression screen-
ing, conduct disorder screening, ADHD screening).
Indicators of Functioning
One of the challenges to this proposed approach to using
screening data for population-based problem identiﬁcation
and monitoring is the lack of uniform measures or indi-
cators of functioning collected by various organizations.
Aggregating data from a variety of sources will be most
beneﬁcial if information is collected on the same indica-
tors, as this will allow for the creation of local norms. For
example, if a number of schools and communities utilize
the same tool for data collection then data can be aggre-
gated in a meaningful and systematic way. However, if
each school in the district utilizes a different approach to
screening, then it will be difﬁcult to compile the data since
some approaches might solely provide indicators of
externalizing problems while others may highlight the
strengths and assets of students.
Indicators or measures are also not abundant, as noted
earlier. The small range of available measures and meth-
odologies suggests that this ﬁeld of practice is far from
mature. However, there are several screening instruments
commonly utilized within schools and the recent avail-
ability of brief, time-efﬁcient screeners could allow for an
entire population (school) to be efﬁciently and systemati-
cally screened for emotional and behavioral problems,
concerns, and strengths.
Although a comprehensive review of current screening
instruments is beyond the scope of this article (see Levitt
et al. 2007), Glover and Albers (2007) provide a set of
criteria for school-based practitioners to utilize when
evaluating universal screening instruments for potential
use: (1) the appropriateness for the intended use including
the match between the instrument and the objectives
underlying its use; (2) the technical adequacy of the
instrument; and (3) the usability of the instrument including
issues such as its practicality and feasibility. Considering
these criteria, Dowdy et al. (2010) identiﬁed the following
commonly utilized instruments as being potentially useful
for
universal
school-based
mental
health
screening:
Strengths and Difﬁculties Questionnaire (SDQ; Goodman
1997); BASC-2 Behavioral and Emotional Screening Sys-
tem (BESS; Kamphaus and Reynolds 2007); Pediatric
Symptom Checklist (PSC; Little, Murphy, Jellinek, Bishop,
& Arnett 1994), and the Systematic Screening for Behavior
Disorders (SSBD; Walker and Severson 1992).
To further highlight how universal screening can
accomplish the goal of problem identiﬁcation and moni-
toring, one approach utilizing the Behavioral and Emo-
tional Screening System (BESS; Kamphaus and Reynolds
2007) will be described in more detail. Consistent with the
recommendations offered earlier, the BESS was developed
under the awareness that for a screener to be truly time-
efﬁcient and effective it should assess multiple areas of
problems and strengths, including internalizing problems,
externalizing problems, school problems, and adaptive
skills. The BESS was designed to be completed within
5 min or less per student, with no training required and can
be completed by various informants (teachers, parents,
students) to identify behavioral and emotional strengths
and weaknesses in youth ranging from preschool through
high school (Kamphaus and Reynolds).
The BESS was normed on a sample of 12,350 teacher,
parent, and student forms, collected from 233 cities in 40
states. The psychometric properties of the BESS are
acceptable
with
high
test–retest
reliability
estimates
(.80–.91) and acceptable inter-rater reliability estimates
(.71–.83). Concurrent validity with other measures of
behavioral rating scales is as follows: Achenbach System of
Empirically Based Assessment (ASEBA, .71–.77), Conners’
Rating Scales (CRS, .51–.79), Vineland Adaptive Behavior
Scales composite (Vineland, .39–.66), Children’s Depres-
sion Inventory (CDI, .51), and the Revised Children’s
Manifest Anxiety Scale (RCMAS, .55). The BESS can be
hand or computer-scored and yields a report including raw
scores, T-scores, and percentiles with high scores reﬂecting
higher risk. Speciﬁcally, a T-score of 20–60 suggests a
‘‘normal’’ level of risk, 61–70 suggests ‘‘elevated’’ risk, and
71 or higher suggests an ‘‘extremely elevated’’ level of risk.
The BESS can be utilized as an initial step in a multiple-
gating procedure to provide an assessment of mental health
disorders. Following the administration of the BESS, stu-
dents that are identiﬁed as having ‘‘elevated or extremely
elevated risk’’ proceed to a second gate. In this second gate,
School Mental Health (2010) 2:166–176
171
123
the Behavior Assessment System for Children—Second
Edition (BASC-2; Reynolds and Kamphaus 2004) is given;
the BASC-2 is a comprehensive, omnibus rating scale that
provides additional information regarding the speciﬁc areas
which might be problematic for the positively screened.
Through this second gate assessment, it might become
apparent that the student is experiencing signiﬁcant prob-
lems with hyperactivity as opposed to depression. A third
gate assessment can be utilized to gather more compre-
hensive information, incorporating multiple sources of
information, to aid in diagnostic and treatment planning.
While multiple-gates are not needed to identify and mon-
itor the mental health status of a population of students, this
detailed follow-up could be conducted at the selected and
indicated levels.
Although it is a newly developed instrument, the utility
of screening for problem identiﬁcation and monitoring
using the BESS is promising. Current research is underway
in which the BESS is being used to universally screen an
entire population of students across several schools.
Teachers and parents at the elementary level and students
at the secondary level have been engaged in a routine,
systematic screening procedure. Through the use of the
screening tool and its analytic software, schools have been
able to pinpoint the exact percentage of students who are at
signiﬁcant risk of developing an emotional or behavioral
problem. Additionally, when used district-wide, districts
can determine if there are signiﬁcant differences across
school sites, grade levels, or student characteristics (age,
sex, race/ethnicity).
In this recent investigation utilizing the BESS to screen a
population of students, the vast majority of students in this
study (at least 80% of all samples) were found to not be at
an elevated risk (Kamphaus et al. 2010). Research such as
this may help to subdue the relatively prevalent fears that
screening will simply identify more problems that can be
tended to. Additionally, the BESS was found to be useful
for identifying both externalizing and internalizing prob-
lems in students with no differences among students clas-
siﬁed in regards to student race/ethnicity or free/reduced
lunch status. While screening did categorize more boys
than girls as being ‘‘at risk,’’ the differences were fewer
than differential placement rates that currently exist in
special education. The data obtained from conducting a
population-based assessment allowed for detailed problem
identiﬁcation. As future screenings are conducted, it will be
possible to also monitor the mental health status of these
students.
Local Norms
Creating local emotional, behavioral, and mental health
norms would require a similar effort to the creation of local
educational (e.g. reading, mathematics) norms that are
burgeoning within response-to-intervention programs at
schools (Vaughn et al. 2003). Curriculum-based measure-
ments of oral reading ﬂuency, for example, are used to
compare the relative achievement of students within a
speciﬁc classroom, grade level, school, or community.
Comparisons are facilitated by utilizing the same tool
across time to collect information on reading ﬂuency. By
analyzing the speciﬁc characteristics of the population
across time, it could be determined that boys have higher
prevalence rates of reading problems and that in particular,
boys in schools with no after-school programming are at
greatest risk. Similarly, such local norms would also be
useful to identify the prevalence and incidence of emo-
tional and behavioral problems (e.g. depression) across
different groups.
Local, commonly referred to as subgroup, norms can be
beneﬁcial in a variety of ways. First, if local norms are
created at the school level, it will be easy to ascertain if
there are any particular students or classrooms that are
outliers, signifying that the child may be experiencing an
unusual amount of distress. Second, if the local norms are
created at a district level then it will be easy to determine if
there are any particular schools that are outliers. This might
indicate that there are signiﬁcant difﬁculties within one
school,
when
compared
to
its
neighboring
schools.
Hypotheses regarding the reasons that students at certain
schools appear to be at higher risk of developing mental
health problems than those at other schools could be gen-
erated. For example, is the afﬂicted school in a neighbor-
hood with limited resources? Does the school have a dearth
of preventative programming when compared to neigh-
boring schools? Finally, local norms could be created at a
community level by incorporating information from a
multiple school districts in the area. By examining these
data for outliers, one could determine if certain school
districts are experiencing more distress, and subsequently
begin the process of determining why that may be.
Local norms also have limitations, the foremost being
that norms cannot provide information for diagnostic pur-
poses. One cannot, for example, create separate diagnostic
criteria for men and women for breast cancer and heart
disease, or girls and boys for ADHD, depression, and
conduct disorder based on information obtained by local
norms. Consequently, subgroup norms are best used for
intervention and prevention planning purposes.
Implications for School Psychology Research
and Practice
At the school level, school-based mental health practitio-
ners can be instrumental in advancing the practice of
172
School Mental Health (2010) 2:166–176
123
population-based screening and are ideally positioned to
take a leadership role in the early identiﬁcation process.
Clearly, school psychologists could not be solely respon-
sible for screening all children within a population; this can
be better accomplished by having teachers, parents, or the
students themselves complete brief behavioral rating
scales. Then, through the use of scanning and analytic
software, school psychologists could easily interpret results
and disseminate ﬁndings. A variety of additional roles and
functions can be performed by school-based mental health
practitioners
including:
establishing
a
planning
and
implementation team; determining the speciﬁc rationale
and goals for screening within their school; evaluating
screening tools and choosing an instrument that aligns with
the goals; identifying the resources that are available to
provide interventions based on screening results; deter-
mining the timeline for implementation and process for
collecting screening data; disseminating results; providing
feedback to teachers, schools, and individual students;
analyzing and summarizing data for district-level report-
ing; linking screening outcomes to services and interven-
tions; and evaluating the screening process (Dowdy et al.
(2010). Furthermore, school-based mental health practi-
tioners can serve as a liaison between various mental health
and educational organizations in the community and
facilitate cross-collaborations among agencies.
The work of population-based mental health identiﬁca-
tion and monitoring is not limited to within schools; in fact,
through effective collaboration, communities could be
better positioned to inform and monitor children’s mental
health needs within the broader community context.
Working within an ecological framework, it is apparent
that problems do not solely exist within a child but are a
function of interactions between the child and a multitude
of environments. Therefore, it is not surprising that orga-
nizations, schools, families, and community agencies
working independently to improve the lives of children
often fall short of having the meaningful impact that could
be possible if their efforts were collaborative and syner-
gistic toward the same goals. Partnerships within the
community would most certainly strengthen the effective-
ness of this proposed population-based approach to prob-
lem identiﬁcation and monitoring and the subsequently
resulting interventions. For example, if schools are aware
that there has been an increase in disruptive behavior
problems in their neighborhood, they can partner with local
family service providers and community organizations to
implement appropriate evidence-based interventions. Sim-
ilarly, if service providers were aware of trends, they would
be able to coordinate services in a more time- and cost-
efﬁcient manner.
A community collaborative to inform, monitor, and treat
student’s
mental
health
necessitates
a
signiﬁcant
partnership among key stakeholders. Leff et al. (2004)
describe a partnership-based framework, based on the
participatory action research (PAR) model also used by
Nastasi et al. (2000), as an effective way to utilize data to
inform and sustain intervention implementation. Working
within this framework involves integrating empirically
established methods with input from key community
stakeholders, in essence adapting evidence-based strategies
to meet the particular needs of the school and community
with whom they are working. A major strength of this
approach is its utility in prevention programming, in that it
allows a school-based mental health researcher or practi-
tioner to impact an entire school population. This approach
progresses through several steps, the ﬁrst of which is
population-based assessment or problem identiﬁcation.
Next, the team conducts a problem analysis, wherein the
research team shares their preliminary ﬁndings with their
collaborators to ensure that their interpretation of the
information gathered is an accurate reﬂection of the school
partners’ perspectives. Subsequently, a culturally relevant
and realistic program is developed and implemented to
address the areas of concern. Finally, researchers and
school partners agree upon an appropriate way in which to
evaluate the success of the new intervention. The active
input of school partners is a requisite component of the
program in which researchers, school partners, and the
school population all stand to beneﬁt. Partnerships utilizing
these key components of participatory action may have
more success when working together to identify and treat
mental health problems within the community.
As limited research currently exists on the use of uni-
versal screening to monitor and inform children’s mental
health, the need for empirical evidence supporting this
approach is pressing. A ﬁrst step involves pilot testing
universal screening tools to determine their appropriateness
speciﬁcally for problem identiﬁcation and mental health
monitoring; the practicality and feasibility of this approach
should be tested (Glover and Albers 2007). Additionally,
the social signiﬁcance of the screening, the social accept-
ability of the procedures, and the social importance of the
effects produced by the screening should be considered
(Lane and Beebe-Frankenberger 2004). Unfortunately, few
studies of school-wide interventions have included mea-
sures of social validity and it has been posited that the
absence of such information can help explain why some
interventions fail (Lane and Beebe-Frankenberger).
Important questions remain about the long-term costs
and beneﬁts of screening, predictive validity of measures,
the relative beneﬁt of using various informants and multi-
ple gates or stages, and paucity of strong outcome or cri-
terion variables. Additionally, the accuracy of some
screening procedures has been questioned, with some
studies suggesting that predictive validity of screening
School Mental Health (2010) 2:166–176
173
123
methodologies is limited (Najman et al. 2007; Roberts et al.
2008). Additional research is warranted that examines the
optimal role of partnerships, the feasibility and accuracy of
screening, as well as the link from problem identiﬁcation
and monitoring to actual intervention and prevention.
These knowledge gaps do not obviate the current need for
screening; in fact, the implementation of screening can
hasten the research enterprise as well (VanDeventer and
Kamphaus in press).
Limitations
This proposed approach to problem identiﬁcation and
monitoring is possible and necessary; however, it is not
without its own set of limitations and barriers. School-
based screening efforts, particularly with regard to mental
health problems, have been controversial and have raised
both ethical and practical concerns (Kratochwill 2007).
Concerns include issues regarding passive versus active
consent for screening, how to handle the potential increase
in services that may be required with an increase in youth
identiﬁed as being in need, the potentially time-consuming
nature of any population-based data effort, and how to
conduct screening in a way that is unobtrusive and not
ecologically disruptive to the school. Details regarding how
and when to collect the data must be tended to. Timing the
administration of a survey to align with other standardized
testing may be practical, but since testing often occurs late
in the year there is an additional time pressure to follow-up
with students who are found to be at risk. Additional
concerns regarding the expense of conducting a school-
wide effort, both in terms of personnel time and monetary
resources, particularly in current times of budget reductions
and furloughs, have also surfaced. A re-allocation of spe-
cial education resources may prove effective for funding
and sustaining a screening program. Additionally, an
established community collaborative, in which data and
resources are shared across multiple agencies, could allow
for cost-sharing, thus minimizing the ﬁnancial burden on
any one school, district, or community mental health
agency.
It may prove feasible to provide follow-up assess-
ment and intervention to students who screen as ‘‘at risk’’
solely within the school environment. This will also require
a re-allocation of resources wherein school-based mental
health professionals are utilized to primarily provide pop-
ulation-based services instead of relying solely on provid-
ing direct services. By catching students early in their
mental health trajectories through systematic, universal
screening and by providing resulting early interventions, it
should theoretically lessen the number of students who
later develop more signiﬁcant problems warranting ter-
tiary services. However, some schools may have limited
resources available to them, and thus may need to coor-
dinate with mental health agencies to make community
referrals. Questions about how best to provide this coor-
dination and seamless service provision, along with ques-
tions about whether school-based screening necessitates
that schools provide interventions to all students who
screen positive, are present. A thorough understanding of
the limitations of this approach provides insight into why
this type of population-based assessment has not been
consistently implemented. Additionally, it provides direc-
tion for future research needs.
Conclusions
Each year signiﬁcant federal, state, and community funds
are dedicated to improve the mental health outcomes for
children. However, each year this aim is not met and the
current system falls short. Additional funding for mental
health and related areas are always sought after, but in lieu
of unlimited funding, adjustments to current practice are
requisite. The key step in reform is to move school-based
psychological services from the back of the service deliv-
ery system, in which only students at the highest level of
risk receive services, to the front of service delivery
through the use of universal, proactive screening. Addi-
tionally, public health ofﬁcials may be well served to
consider partnering with local schools and communities to
collect this detailed level of information on the mental
health status of students in an effort to better understand
the shortcomings of the current mental health care system.
A continued focus on early identiﬁcation and early inter-
vention is necessary.
By taking this public health approach to problem iden-
tiﬁcation and monitoring, school-based mental health pro-
fessionals may start to impact the larger population and
truly begin to provide population-based services. School-
based mental health professionals possess a unique skill set
with a solid understanding of statistics, measurement,
consultation, and school-family community partnerships.
Additionally, they needed access to school records, school
ofﬁcials, and community stakeholders who can help to
effect change. The arguments presented earlier provide
evidence and a call to action for school-based mental
health professionals to expand their role to include popu-
lation-based services utilizing school-based screening data
to identify and monitor the mental health needs of students.
Population-based indicators of functioning are needed to
not only help determine the incidence and prevalence of
mental health problems but also to help determine the
future course of action. The paradigm shift to one of
population-based assessment and monitoring goes beyond
a change in the daily practice of school mental health
174
School Mental Health (2010) 2:166–176
123
practitioners and psychologists, but also has implications
for how mental health is conceptualized within society.
When adopting the public health viewpoint that the health
or illness of one individual affects an entire population, a
coordinated effort to provide assessment and prevention
for all, and intervention for those in need is certainly
warranted.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which per-
mits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
References
Biglan, A., Mrazek, P. J., Carnine, D., & Flay, B. R. (2003). The
integration of research and practice in the prevention of youth
problem behaviors. The American Psychologist, 58, 433–440.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development:
Experiments by nature and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Brunsman, B. A. (2003). Review of the DIBELS: Dynamic indicators
of basic early literacy skills. In B. S. Plake, J. C. Impara, & R. A.
Spies (Eds.), The ﬁfteenth mental measurements yearbook (6th
ed., pp. 307–310). Lincoln, NE: Buros Institute of Mental
Measurements.
Burns, B. J., Costello, E. J., Angold, A., Tweed, D., Stangl, D.,
Farmer, E. M. Z., et al. (1995). Children’s mental health service
use across service sectors. Health Affairs, 14, 149–159.
Carter, A. S., Briggs-Gowan, M. J., & Davis, N. O. (2004).
Assessment of young children’s social-emotional development
and psychopathology: Recent advances and recommendations
for practice. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 45(1),
109–134.
Cash, R. E., & Nealis, L. K. (2004). Mental health in the schools: It’s
a matter of public policy. Paper presented at the National
Association of School Psychologists Public Policy Institute,
Washington, DC.
Costello, E. J., Mustillo, S., Erkanli, A., Keeler, G., & Angold, A.
(2003). Prevalence and development of psychiatric disorders in
childhood and adolescence. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60,
837–844.
DiStefano, C. A., & Kamphaus, R. W. (2007). Development and
validation of a behavioral screener for preschool-age children.
Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 15(2), 93–102.
Doll, B., & Cummings, J. (2008a). Best practices in population-based
school mental health services. In A. Thomas & J. Grimes (Eds.),
Best practices in school psychology V (pp. 1333–1347).
Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists.
Doll, B., & Cummings, J. (2008b). Why population-based services are
essential for school mental health, and how to make them happen
in your school. In B. Doll & J. Cummings (Eds.), Transforming
school mental health services: Population-based approaches to
promoting the competency and wellness of children. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Dowdy, E., Furlong, M., Eklund, K., Saeki, E., & Ritchey, K. (2010).
Screening for mental health and wellness: Current school-based
practices and emerging possibilities. In B. Doll, W. Pfohl, & J. S.
Yoon (Eds.), Handbook of youth prevention science. New York:
Routledge.
Drerup, L. C., Croysdale, A., & Hoffmann, N. G. (2008). Patterns of
behavioral health conditions among adolescents in a juvenile
justice system. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
39(2), 122–128.
Durlak, J. A. (1997). Successful prevention programs for children and
adolescents. New York: Plenum Press.
Eaton, D. K., Kann, L., Kinchen, S. A., Ross, J. G., Hawkins, J.,
Harris, W. A., et al. (2006). Youth risk behavioral surveillance –
United States, 2005. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 55,
SS–5.
Glover, T., & Albers, C. (2007). Considerations for evaluating
universal screening assessments. Journal of School Psychology,
45(2), 117–135.
Good, R. H., & Kaminski, R. A. (Eds.). (2002). Dynamic indicators of
basic early literacy skills (6th ed.). Eugene, OR: Institute for the
Development
of
Education
Achievement.
Available
at
http://dibels.uoregon.edu.
Gruenbaum, J., Kann, L., Kincjen, S. A., Williams, B., Ross, J. G.,
Hawkins, J., et al. (2004). Youth risk behavior surveillance –
United States, 2003. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 53,
SS–2.
Gruenbaum, J., Kann, L., Kincjen, S. A., Williams, B., Ross, J. G.,
Lowrey, R., et al. (2002). Youth risk behavioral surveillance –
United States, 2001. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 51,
SS–4.
Harrison, P. L., Cummings, J. A., Dawson, M., Short, R. J., Gorin, S., &
Palomares, R. (2004). Responding to the needs of children,
families, and schools: The 2002 multisite conference on the future
of school psychology. School Psychology Review, 33, 12–33.
Hill, L. G., Lochman, J. E., Coie, J. D., Greenberg, M. T., & The
Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. (2004). Effec-
tiveness of early screening for externalizing problems: Issues of
screening accuracy and utility. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 72, 809–820.
Horner, R., Sugai, G., & Gresham, F. (2002). Behaviorally effective
school environments. In M. R. Shinn, H. M. Walker, & G. Stoner
(Eds.), Interventions for academic and behavior problems II (pp.
315–350). Bethesda, MD: National Association of School
Psychologists.
Hunter, L. (2003). School psychology: A public health framework III.
Managing disruptive behavior in schools: The value of a public
health and evidence-based perspective. Journal of School
Psychology, 41, 39–59.
Institute of Medicine. (1988). The future of public health. Washing-
ton, DC: National Academy Press.
Kamphaus, R. W., DiStefano, C., Dowdy, E., Eklund, K., & Dunn, A.
(2010). Determining the presence of a ‘‘problem’’: A comparison
of teacher screener test development methodologies for detection
of behavioral and emotional risk. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Kamphaus, R. W., & Reynolds, C. R. (2007). Behavior assessment
system for children—second edition (BASC-2): Behavioral and
Emotional
Screening
System
(BESS).
Bloomington,
MN:
Pearson.
Kann, L. (2001). The youth risk behavior surveillance system:
Measuring health-risk behaviors. American Journal of Health
Behavior, 25(3), 272–277.
Kataoka, S. H., Zhang, L., & Wells, K. B. (2002). Unmet need for
mental health care among U.S. children: Variation by ethnicity
and insurance status. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159,
1548–1555.
Kleiver, A., & Cash, R. E. (2005). Characteristics of a public health
model of a mental health service delivery. Communique, 34(3), 19.
Kratochwill, T. R. (2007). Preparing psychologists for evidence-based
school practice: Lessons learned and challenges ahead. American
Psychologist, 62, 829–843.
Lane, K. L., & Beebe-Frankenberger, M. (2004). School-based
interventions: The tools you need to succeed. Boston: Pearson.
School Mental Health (2010) 2:166–176
175
123
Leff, S. S., Costigan, T., & Power, T. J. (2004). Using participatory
research to develop a playground-based prevention program.
Journal of School Psychology, 42, 3–21.
Levitt, J. M., Saka, N., Romanelli, L. H., & Hoagwood, K. (2007).
Early identiﬁcation of mental health problems in schools: The
status of instrumentation. Journal of School Psychology, 45,
163–191.
Mills, C., Stephan, S. H., Moore, E., Weist, M. D., Daly, B. P., &
Edwards, M. (2006). The President’s New Freedom Commis-
sion: Capitalizing on opportunities to advance school-based
mental health services. Clinical Child and Family Psychology
Review, 9(3), 149–161.
Najman, J. M., Heron, M. A., Hayatbakhsh, M. R., Dingle, K.,
Jamrozik, K., Bor, W., et al. (2007). Screening in early
childhood for risk of later mental health problems: A longitu-
dinal study. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 42, 694–700.
Nastasi, B. (2004). Meeting the challenges of the future: Integrating
publich health and public education for mental health promotion.
Journal of Educational and Psychological Consultation, 15(3),
295–312.
Nastasi, B. K., Varjas, K., Schensul, S. L., Silva, K. T., Schensul, J. J.,
& Ratnayake, P. (2000). The participatory intervention model: A
framework for conceptualizing and promoting intervention
acceptability. School Psychology Quarterly, 15, 207–232.
Osher, D., Dwyer, K., & Jackson, S. (2004). Safe, supportive, and
successful schools: Step by step. Cambridge: Blackwell.
Reynolds, C. R., & Kamphaus, R. W. (2004). Behavior assessment
system for children-second edition (BASC-2). Circle Pines, MN:
AGS.
Roberts, N., Stuart, H., & Lam, M. (2008). High school mental health
survey: Assessment of a mental health screen. Canadian Journal
of Psychiatry, 53, 314–322.
Romer, D., & McIntosh, M. (2005). The roles and perspectives of
school mental health professionals in promoting adolescent
mental health. In D. L. Evans, E. B. Foa, R. E. Gur, H. Hendin,
C. P. O’Brien, M. E. P. Seligman, & B. T. Walsh (Eds.),
Treating and preventing adolescent mental health disorders:
What we know and what we don’t know (pp. 598–615)). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Short, R. J. (2003). Commentary: School psychology, context, and
population-based
practice.
School
Psychology
Review,
32,
181–184.
Short, R. J., & Strein, W. (2008). Behavioral and social epidemiology:
Population-based problem identiﬁcation and monitoring. In B.
Doll & J. Cummings (Eds.), Transforming school mental health
services: Population-based approaches to promoting the com-
petency and wellness of children. Thousand Oaks: Corwin Press.
VanDerHeyden, A. M., Witt, J. C., & Gilbertson, D. (2007). A multi-
year evaluation of the effects of a response to intervention (RTI)
model on identiﬁcation of children for special education. Journal
of School Psychology, 45, 225–256.
VanDeventer, M. C., & Kamphaus, R. W. (in press). Mental health
screening at school: Instrumentation, implementation, and
critical issues. New York: Springer.
Vaughn, S., Linan-Thompson, S., & Hickman, P. (2003). Response to
instruction as a means of identifying students with reading/
learning disabilities. Exceptional Children, 69(4), 391–409.
Walker, H. M., & Severson, H. H. (1992). Systematic screening for
behavior disorders (2nd ed.). Longmont, CO: Sopris West.
176
School Mental Health (2010) 2:166–176
123
