Toward the Integration of Education and Mental Health in Schools
Marc S. Atkins,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Institute for Juvenile Research, 1747 W. Roosevelt Rd., Room 155,
Chicago, IL 60608, USA, Atkins@uic.edu
Kimberly E. Hoagwood,
Columbia University and New York Office of Mental Health, New York, NY, USA
Krista Kutash, and
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
Edward Seidman
W.T. Grant Foundation and New York University, New York, NY, USA
Abstract
Education and mental health integration will be advanced when the goal of mental health includes
effective schooling and the goal of effective schools includes the healthy functioning of students. To
build a solid foundation for this reciprocal agenda, especially within the zeitgeist of recent educational
reforms, a change in the fundamental framework within which school mental health is conceptualized
is needed. This change involves acknowledging a new set of priorities, which include: the use of
naturalistic resources within schools to implement and sustain effective supports for students'
learning and emotional/behavioral health; inclusion of integrated models to enhance learning and
promote health; attention to improving outcomes for all students, including those with serious
emotional/ behavioral needs; and strengthening the active involvement of parents. A strong research
agenda to support these new priorities is essential.
Keywords
Children's mental health services; School-based mental health services; Education; Ecological
models
Recent national reform efforts in education and in mental health provide a unique opportunity
for re-examining models to better integrate learning and behavioral health. Both the Surgeon
General's report (US DHSS 1999) and the report from the President's New Freedom
Commission on Mental Health (2003) propose the expansion of mental health services for
children in schools. Likewise, the No Child Left Behind Act, signed into law in 2002,
emphasized accountability, particularly for academic achievement and increased use of
scientifically-based programs and teaching methods, and it stressed the need to ensure “student
access to quality mental health care by developing innovative programs to link the local school
system with the local mental health system” (U.S. Department of Education Office of
Elementary and Secondary Education 2002, p. 427). Clearly, at the federal level there is support
for a closer alignment between education and mental health.
Correspondence to: Marc S. Atkins.
A paper prepared for the Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services: Issues and Solutions Conference held September 23-24, 2009
in Nashville, TN.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Adm Policy Ment Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 1.
Published in final edited form as:
Adm Policy Ment Health. 2010 March ; 37(1-2): 40–47. doi:10.1007/s10488-010-0299-7.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
While there is an emerging consensus for locating mental health programs in schools, the role
and structure of these services are varied and the empirical base is limited (Hoagwood and
Erwin 1997). We propose that new priorities within the educational reform movement provide
a timely opportunity for integrating mental health goals and educational services. Specifically,
educational reform efforts are driving a renewed focus on accountability, outcomes,
personalized learning, early intervention, and flexible learning supports (e.g., Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation 2009; Lachat 2001) and schools are required to develop school improvement
plans to meet federal and state mandates to increase school effectiveness. In addition, with the
reauthorization of theIndividuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA 2004), early
intervention (pre-referral) services were included, which allowed for special education funding
to be allocated for evidence-based academic and behavioral support services. To implement
this policy, the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework was developed (Reschly and
Bergstrom 2009), which includes tiered responses from prevention to early intervention, to
more intensive treatments and ongoing assessments to monitor improvement and the need for
alternative interventions (Kratochwill et al. 2007).The Children' Education Council (2008)
reported that 60% of districts had begun adopting an RtI approach as of March, 2008. Thus,
these initiatives within education indicate that the potential for expanding behavioral health
services within the paradigm of these educational efforts is considerable. However, to do so
will require a different set of priorities for research and practice from those that dominate
school-based services currently.
Given the limited progress in establishing consensus about effective and efficient school mental
health programs that can be sustained within the varied ecologies of schools (see Adelman and
Taylor 2006; Evans and Weist 2004), the purpose of this paper is to suggest a re-prioritized
research agenda that privileges mental health programs and practices that are integrated into
the school ecology. This change involves acknowledging the use of naturalistic resources
within schools to implement and sustain effective supports for students' learning and emotional/
behavioral health; inclusion of integrated models to enhance learning and promote health; the
need for improved outcomes for all students, including those with serious emotional/behavioral
needs; and the importance of strengthening the active involvement of parents. A research
agenda to align with these priorities is described.
School-Based Mental Health Services: Problems and Prospects
Since publication of Bronfenbrenner's ground-breaking theory of human ecological systems
(Bronfenbrenner 1979; Bronfenbrenner and Morris 1998), children's development has been
understood as influenced by the interacting natural contexts in which children live, work, and
play. Schools represent among the most influential of these contexts by virtue of their long-
term influence on children's cognitive and social development. Toward that end, schooling has
been a long-standing concern of mental health professionals, and as importantly, children's
social and emotional adjustment has been a long-standing concern of schools. Educators have
long noted that the unmet psychosocial needs of children and families overwhelm the resources
of schools and undermine their capacity to educate children (e.g., Carnegie Council on
Adolescent Development 1989). With the passage in 1975 of PL 94-142, the first federal law
mandating equal access to public education for children with handicaps, a range of expanded
agendas—such as full-service schools and school-based mental health programs—has been
advocated with the goal to integrate educational and mental health services (Cappella and
Larner 1999; Dryfoos 1994). These programs, started in the mid-1980's in a handful of schools,
have spread to thousands of schools across the nation (Foster et al. 2005). Lawson and Sailor
(2000) review this history and note that, despite differences across programs, all presume the
need to incorporate a broader agenda beyond academic achievement. Similarly, a consensus
statement coordinated by the UCLA National Center for Mental Health in Schools (2001)
promoted integrated mental health and educational goals.
Atkins et al.
Page 2
Adm Policy Ment Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
However, while the goal of integrating mental health and education may be shared by many
educators and mental health professionals, there is little consensus on the optimal ways to
package or integrate supports within schools to achieve these goals. Although schools are
commonly regarded as the dominant de facto providers of mental health services for youth
(Burns et al. 1995; Farmer et al. 2003), providing an estimated 70–80% of psychosocial services
to those children who receive services (Rones and Hoagwood 2000), there is, as yet, scant
evidence for the effectiveness of current school-based service models, and reason to think that
these services are providing little advantage over clinic-based services (Kutash et al. 2006).
A recent national survey of school-based mental health programs indicated that a vast majority
of programs provide “pull-out” screening and counseling services to referred children (Foster
et al. 2005), which are resource intensive and often compete with instructional time. In addition,
the “clinic within schools” model provides few opportunities for interdisciplinary collaboration
between mental health providers and educators, and even when successful, accommodates a
relatively small proportion of the children in need of services (Baker et al. 2006). Furthermore,
the negative environment in many schools in impoverished communities can overwhelm
educational and mental health programs and is largely unaddressed by current school-based
service models (Cappella et al. 2008; Gottfredson and Gottfredson 2002; Hoagwood et al.
2007). As many have noted, these issues suggest that the presumption of integrated services
in schools is in need of critical analysis (e.g., Baker et al. 2006; Boyd and Shouse 1997;
Ringeisen et al. 2003; Weinstein 2002).
An Ecological Approach for School-Based Mental Health Services
Ecological models for school-based mental health services provide a compelling unifying
framework to guide research, policy, and practice. Ecological models are by definition
individualized to the differing contexts within and across schools, which is important to offset
the concern with current school-based models that they are unresponsive to school context
(Hoagwood et al. 2007; Ringeisen et al. 2003). Among the most important implications of an
ecological model is that the identification of mental health need would emerge from an
assessment of children's functioning and competencies in natural settings (in this case, school),
thus avoiding the often arbitrary diagnostic constructs prominent in child psychopathology
(Jensen and Hoagwood 1997). In this way, the goal of focusing on improved functioning rather
than symptom reduction (e.g., Hoagwood et al. 1996) would be prioritized. This focus on
competency could also create a better alignment between educational and mental health policy,
with many federal and state agencies adopting the concepts of impairment, functioning, and
competencies within their definition of a mental health condition that requires services (Canino
et al. 1999). In fact, in the latest version of the Institute of Medicine Report (National Research
Council and Institute of Medicine 2009), promotion goals along with a focus on the
development of competencies have been embraced.
Complimentary to this focus on the enhancement of competencies related to the core function
of schooling is the fact that learning occurs within a social environment that includes
interactions with teachers and other children (e.g., Brown et al. 2010). Thus, promoting the
social-emotional aspects of development in children can be critical to the pursuit of academic
learning (Payton et al. 2008). However, while it is acknowledged that schools spend
considerable effort on implementing a wide range of programs that address the social-
emotional development of students (Zins et al. 2004), these efforts are usually seen as tangential
rather than core to the function of schools. More effective models for integrating social-
emotional learning into the ongoing practices of schooling are needed.
Atkins et al.
Page 3
Adm Policy Ment Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Use of indigenous Resources Within School Settings
An important component of integrating mental health efforts into the ongoing routines of
schools is the identification and support of indigenous persons and resources within schools
as agents of change. This follows logically from the prioritizing of school goals for mental
health programs and is important to insure the sustainability of program goals and processes,
as well as to reconcile the workforce imbalance relative to regional disparities and the high
need for services. The identification of indigenous resources involves both the selection of
primary change agents and recognition of those factors involved in the successful performance
of their roles. For example, the most obvious change agents in schools are teachers, as they
control the setting of primary importance to children's learning, classrooms (Atkins et al.
2008). Factors associated with successful schooling would therefore be prioritized (e.g.,
effective instruction and classroom management), but goals such as enhancing teachers'
ongoing support and learning structures would also become more central, as emerging evidence
from several ongoing experimental classroom and school-based trials seems to suggest (Pianta
and Allen 2008; LaRusso et al. 2009; Jones et al. under review). These same studies have also
demonstrated a focus on effective instruction and classroom management as a strong predictor
of children's future success. Similarly, children's peers have an important influence on students'
schooling, with programs such as classroom peer tutoring demonstrating strong effects on
children's learning and behavior (Rivera et al. 2006). Peer norms for achievement and behavior
are relevant targets of change with a literature emerging on effective strategies to align peer
influences with classroom academic and behavioral goals (e.g., Farmer and Xie 2007; Ryan et
al. 2004).
While we acknowledge that schools, particularly in urban settings, continue to be challenged
by the overall lack of resources and by the demands on teachers' time, the point here is the need
to develop strategies that optimize, enhance, and augment the goals of education, rather than
superimposing a new set of programs or professionals on these (often) beleaguered schools.
Thus, it follows that using mental health staff as “educational enhancers” to assist teachers in
providing effective instruction and classroom management may be wise and is a different
paradigm from traditional mental health practices in schools. In addition, imbedding mental
health staff within natural settings such as classrooms can improve consultation efforts through
the relationships that are formed and improve the implementation of the programs that are
developed through enhanced input from school staff (e.g., Atkins et al. 2006).
Diffusion of Innovation and Social Network Theory
Another implication of prioritizing indigenous resources is the application of diffusion theory
to program development. Studies that have examined diffusion of innovation have determined
that program response, or more precisely the degree to which programs are adopted within a
setting, are largely a function of social interactional networks (Greenhalgh et al. 2004; Rogers
2000). For example, Valente has shown that social networks are characterized by early adopters
who may be influential within their own social network but whose influence within the larger
setting may be small. Late adopters, or laggards, appear to wait until a threshold of program
utilizers have emerged, which is referred to as a “tipping point”. Valente has shown that this
occurs often when 25% of a social network are utilizers (Valente and Davis 1999).
The implication of social network theory for mental health programs is twofold. First, program
response should be understood as unfolding over time. A premature determination of poor
program implementation may not only incorrectly assess the ultimate influence of the program,
it may also disrupt the successful adoption of a novel intervention to a social setting. For
example, this could occur when intervention supports (e.g., supervision, coaching) are
withdrawn prematurely or by overly encouraging the use of an intervention by members who
Atkins et al.
Page 4
Adm Policy Ment Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
may need more time to accept the new intervention. An overemphasis on early acceptance of
an intervention by skeptical providers can lead to program developers to categorize providers
as either supportive or resistant to change, which is a naïve understanding of change occurring
within social systems.
Second, if programs are not adopted throughout a social system (i.e., if programs are used only
by early adopters or abandoned after supports are withdrawn), this could suggest that the
program is not seen by a sufficient number of members as appropriate or important to their
needs. Models for activating key opinion leaders to influence mental health program use have
emerged with largely positive effects (Thomson O'Brien et al. 2006), including in schools
(Atkins et al. 2008). In addition, key opinion leader involvement can assist program
modifications that may be necessary to increase utilization and thereby encourage a more
sustainable adoption of the intervention (Locock et al. 2001).
A Focus on Improving Outcomes for all Students
Even under ideal conditions to support program adaption and adoption, the field faces a major
challenge in developing a unified research agenda on effective school models that will support
the learning and behavioral health for students in special education due to emotional or
behavioral disorders. This population of youth, estimated at 450,000 (Jans et al. 2004), have
the poorest outcomes of all youth served in special education, with over half of these youth
dropping out of school each year; the highest rate for any educational disability category (Jans
et al. 2004). This dropout rate reflects the fact that these students earn lower grades and fail
more courses than any other disability group served in special education environments
(Landrum et al. 2003). As noted by data from the U. S. Department of Education (2002), adding
to these bleak outcomes is the fact that 47% of all elementary/middle school children classified
as emotionally disturbed have been suspended or expelled at some time during their school
career, while 73% of youth with emotional disturbances at the secondary level have been
subject to this kind of disciplinary action. Additionally, 61% of youth with emotional
disturbance served in a special education setting score in the bottom quartile on standardized
reading measures. Yet, less than 40% of these youth are receiving any type of mental health
services along with their special education classroom services (Wagner et al. 2006). Thus, this
remains a critically understudied group of youth with few empirically supported integrative
models available to overcome these poor outcomes.
In an attempt to understand the lack of mental health services delivered to these youth, Minow
(2001) found that psychological services were not often implemented for students who have
emotional disturbance and are in special education because professionals were diverted to
testing and crisis intervention rather than sustained support. She further found that “many
school systems resist the provision of related services on the theory that they are not educational
but medical or psychological, even though these services are required under the act where
necessary to enable the student's free appropriate public education. Provision of related services
often fails when school districts and other local agencies disagree over who should provide
and pay for them” (Minow 2001, p. 4). These results highlight several issues surrounding the
implementation of effective mental health for children with emotional disorders served in
special education and point to next steps for the research community.
First, there continues to be a weak research base supporting effective interventions that address
both the educational and emotional functioning of youth with emotional disorders who are
served in special education programs (Rones and Hoagwood 2000), with the majority of school-
based mental health research initiatives excluding this group of youth. Second, there is a lack
of theoretical models to guide the development of the components needed to address both the
emotional and educational needs of this population within a special education setting. Third,
Atkins et al.
Page 5
Adm Policy Ment Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
research on implementation challenges needs to focus on this specific population and setting,
as general implementation research may not be adequate to address issues related to this setting
and population.
Integration of Promotion, Prevention and Intervention
Currently, programs that focus on promotion, prevention, or intervention services often
compete for priority within schools. With diminishing resources, this competition is likely to
increase. For children with intensive needs, such as those receiving special education services,
the advantages of linking mental health services to schooling are considerable. Children's
mental health difficulties commonly manifest themselves in schools with a resulting decrement
in performance, or, in the extreme, suspension or expulsion (e.g., Atkins et al. 2002). Teachers
and other school staff often do not have the resources or skills to manage high need children,
especially in high-poverty communities where student-to-staff ratios are high and technology
or other resources are scarce. Many children with mental health needs are highly susceptible
to disruptions in daily activities. Therefore, classroom-wide programming for normative events
such as transitions throughout the school day, or class-wide routines such as silent reading or
group instruction, can often ameliorate their difficulties. In addition, classroom or school-wide
programs can serve as a naturalistic base from which individualized programs can be developed
for children with more intensive needs, avoiding the stigmatization that often arises when
individualized programs are implemented in isolation of other program goals (Kratochwill
2007). See the APA Task Force on Evidence-Based Practices for Children and Adolescents
(2008) for more details about integrative models.
As an example of a school-wide program that can serve as a facilitator of more intensive
individualized programs for high need youth, Embry and his colleagues (Embry 2002; Embry
and Straalemeier 2001) have developed a range of programs for the Good Behavior Game that
begin with classroom-wide (and often school-wide) implementation, with specified
adaptations to design individualized programs for children who require them. The LIFT
program (Eddy et al. 2000) for example, examined educational strategies, classroom
management approaches, and linkage to parents for youth at risk of emotional or behavioral
problems and found that this model delayed the onset of problematic behaviors.
Another example reflective of the ecological and mental health approach is the interest and
growth in implementing a form of school-wide positive behavior support called Positive
Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS: Lewis and Sugai 1999). PBIS includes a set of
evidence-based strategies at the individual and system levels with the goal of improving student
behavior and learning and is currently being implemented in over 7,500 schools (Bradshaw et
al. 2009). Cappella et al. (2008) suggest that mental health professionals, including those based
in schools (e. g, school counselors and part-time psychologists), as well as community-based
personnel can assume roles within each of the universal, targeted, and intensive levels of the
PBIS framework. Mental health providers can support the school counselor in implementing
school-wide, universal programs in the cafeteria, hallways, and playgrounds by providing
training and supervision of security guides, lunchroom aides, and playground monitors. At the
targeted level, mental health personnel can assist school administrators in collecting data and
intervene in high need classrooms or settings. At the intensive level, a community mental health
provider linked with the school can provide direct services as well as activate additional
personnel for students with more chronic needs (Atkins et al. 2006).
Enhancing Active Involvement of Parents in Schools
Although active involvement of parents in their child's learning and participation in school has
been given considerable attention within the school psychology literature (e.g., Sheridan and
Kratochwill 1992), many schools still limit family involvement to a narrow set of activities,
Atkins et al.
Page 6
Adm Policy Ment Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
such as assessment and problem solving. Ways to expand involvement of parents in schools
are being examined with different approaches and strategies through targeted engagement
processes (McKay and Bannon 2004), specialized outreach programs delivered by parents to
parents of students with mental health needs (Atkins et al. 1998; Kutash and Duchnowski
2008), and use of strategic family support techniques (Hoagwood et al. 2010; Robbins et al.
2008), for example. This paradigm is in sharp contrast to the separatist tradition of having
schools assume the role of “in locus parentis” (Weist et al. 2009). However, the research base
remains thin and uneven, although some components of family support (i.e., skill-building,
parent management) have received more research attention than others (i.e., advocacy support)
(Hoagwood et al. 2010).
Research Agenda
A research agenda to promote a new model of children's mental health services should examine
the operation of classroom-, school-, and district-level processes and policies and how they
facilitate or hinder the educational and social-emotional development objectives for all children
and youth. Specific recommendations are:
1.
The examination of classroom- and school-based processes and identification of
where levels of opportunity exist to promote children's school success and social-
emotional development. For example, we need to increase our understanding of
teacher–student interactions, student-to-student interactions, and teacher support
structures that facilitate classroom management, learning, and development of both
teachers and students. It follows that, by necessity, improvements in the measurement
of these processes are also needed.
2.
Future research should examine how best to deploy and support indigenous resources
within school settings to meet the mental health needs of students. Examples are the
involvement of teachers as key informants to promote classroom and school-based
programs (e.g., Atkins et al. 2008), and the involvement of parents and other
community members to enhance parent involvement activities (e.g., Frazier et al.
2007).
3.
Effective and efficient service models that integrate promotion, prevention and
interventions are needed. This should include consideration of the mental health needs
of the entire school population, especially for children receiving special education
resources, a highly underserved population in regard to their mental health needs.
Research needs to focus on this specific population and setting, as general
implementation research may not be adequate to address issues related to children
receiving special education services.
4.
The impact of school district policies on educational and mental health promotion is
another unaddressed area of our understanding. For example, fiscal barriers to
integrating mental health supports should be examined and strategies for eliminating
economic disincentives to integrative services need to be identified.
Summary
Current models of school-based mental health remain overly focused on conventional
definitions of mental health practice and provide inadequate attention to contextual issues that
may influence both schooling and mental health. We propose a renewed agenda for school
mental health services that considers the school context as a means of promoting children's
mental health, and makes children's adaptation to school a primary goal for services. This
agenda involves acknowledging a new set of priorities, which include: the use of naturalistic
resources within schools to implement and sustain effective supports for students' learning and
Atkins et al.
Page 7
Adm Policy Ment Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
emotional/behavioral health; inclusion of integrated models to enhance learning and promote
health; attention to improving outcomes for all students, including those with serious
emotional/behavioral needs; and strengthening the active involvement of parents. Toward this
goal, mental health services research can contribute to effective schooling by proposing targets
for change and collaborating with educators to understand how to best effect these changes
(Linney and Seidman 1989; Seidman and Tseng 2010). A strong research agenda to support
these new priorities is essential.
References
Adelman, H.; Taylor, L. The implementation guide to student learning supports in the classroom and
school wide: New directions for addressing barriers to learning. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press;
2006.
Disseminating evidence-based practice for children and adolescents: A systems approach to enhancing
care. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; 2008. American Psychological
Association Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice for Children and Adolescents.
Atkins M, Frazier S, Birman D, Adil J, Jackson M, Graczyk P, et al. School-based mental health services
for children living in high poverty urban communities. Administration and Policy in Mental Health
and Mental Health Services Research 2006;33:146–159. [PubMed: 16502132]
Atkins M, Frazier S, Leathers S, Graczyk P, Talbott E, Adil J, et al. Teacher key opinion leaders and
mental health consultation in urban low-income schools. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology 2008;76:905–908. [PubMed: 18837608]
Atkins M, McKay M, Arvanitis P, London L, Madison S, Costigan C, et al. An ecological model for
school-based mental health services for urban low income aggressive children. The Journal of
Behavioral Health Services & Research 1998;5:64–75.
Atkins MS, McKay MM, Frazier SL, Jakobsons LJ, Arvanitis P, Cunningham T, et al. Suspensions and
detentions in an urban, low-income school: Punishment or reward? Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology 2002;30:361–371. [PubMed: 12108766]
Baker JA, Kamphaus RW, Horne A, Winsor AP. Evidence for population-based perspectives on
children's behavioral adjustment and needs for service delivery in schools. School Psychology Review
2006;35:31–46.
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Foundation commits $335 million to promote effective teaching and
raise student achievement. 2009.
http://www.gatesfoundation.org/press-releases/Pages/intensive-partnership-for-effective-
teaching-091119.aspx.
Boyd, WL.; Shouse, RC. The problems and promise of urban schools. In: Walberg, HJ.; Reyes, O.;
Weissberg, RP., editors. Children and youth: Interdisciplinary perspectives. ThousandOaks, CA: Sage
Publications; 1997. p. 141-165.
Bradshaw CP, Koth CW, Thornton LA, Leaf PJ. Altering school climate through school-wide positive
behavioral interventions and supports: Findings from a group-randomized effectiveness trial.
Prevention Science 2009;10:100–115. [PubMed: 19011963]
Bronfenbrenner U. Contexts of child rearing: Problems and prospects. American Psychologist
1979;34:844–850.
Bronfenbrenner U, Morris P. The ecology of developmental process. Handbook of Child Psychology
1998;1:993–1029.
Brown JL, Jones SM, LaRusso M, Aber JL. Improving classroom quality: Teacher influences and
experimental impacts of the 4Rs Program. Journal of Educational Psychology 2010;102:153–167.
Burns BJ, Costello EJ, Angold A, Tweed D, Stangl D, Farmer EM, et al. Children's mental health service
use across service sectors. Health Affairs 1995;14:147–159. [PubMed: 7498888]
Canino G, Costello EJ, Angold A. Assessing functional impairment and social adaptation for child mental
health services research: A review of measures. Mental Health Services Research 1999;1:93–108.
Cappella E, Frazier S, Atkins M, Schoenwald S, Glisson C. Enhancing schools' capacity to support
children in poverty: An ecological model of school-based mental health services. Administration and
Atkins et al.
Page 8
Adm Policy Ment Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research 2008;35:395–409. [PubMed:
18581225]
Cappella E, Larner M. America's schoolchildren: Past, present, and future. The Future of Children
1999;9:21–29. [PubMed: 10646255]
Carnegie Council on Adolescent Development. Turning points: Preparing American youth for the 21st
century, Report of the task force on education of youth adolescents. New York: Author; 1989.
Dryfoos, J. Full-service schools: A revolution in health and social services for children, youth and
families. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass; 1994.
Eddy JM, Reid JB, Fetow RA. An elementary school-based prevention program targeting modifiable
antecedents of youth delinquency and violence. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders
2000;8:165–176.
Embry DD. The good behavior game: A best practice candidate as a universal behavioral vaccine. Clinical
Child & Family Psychology Review 2002;5:273–297. [PubMed: 12495270]
Embry, DD.; Straalemeier, G. The PAX acts game manual: How to apply the good behavior game.
Tucson, AZ: PAXIS Institute; 2001.
Evans SW, Weist MD. Implementing empirically supported treatments in the schools: What are we
asking? Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review 2004;7:263–267. [PubMed: 15648280]
Farmer E, Burns B, Phillips S, Angold A, Costello E. Pathways into and through mental health services
for children and adolescents. Psychiatric Services 2003;54:60–66. [PubMed: 12509668]
Farmer TW, Xie H. Aggression and school social dynamics: The good, the bad, and the ordinary. Journal
of School Psychology 2007;45:461–478.
Foster, S.; Rollefson, M.; Doksum, T.; Noonan, D.; Robinson, G.; Teich, J. School mental health services
in the United States, 2002–2003. HHHS Pub. No. (SMA) 05–4068. Rockville, MD: Center for Mental
Health Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration; 2005.
Frazier SL, Abdul-Adil J, Atkins MS, Gathright T, Jackson M. Can't have one without the other: Mental
health providers and community parents reducing barriers to services for families in urban poverty.
Journal of Community Psychology 2007;35:435–446.
Gottfredson DC, Gottfredson GD. Quality of school-based prevention programs: Results from a national
survey. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 2002;39:3–35.
Greenhalgh T, Robert G, MacFarlane F, Bate P, Kyuriakidou O. Diffusion of innovations in service
organizations: Systematic review and recommendations. The Milbank Quarterly 2004;82:581–629.
[PubMed: 15595944]
Hoagwood KE, Cavaleri MA, Olin SS, Burns BJ, Slaton E, Gruttadaro D, Hughes R. Family support in
children's mental health: A review and synthesis. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review
2010;13:1–45. [PubMed: 20012893]
Hoagwood K, Erwin HD. Effectiveness of school-based mental health services for children: A 10-year
research review. Journal of Child and Family Studies 1997;6:435–451.
Hoagwood KE, Jensen PS, Petti T, Burns BJ. Outcomes of mental health care for children and adolescents:
I. A comprehensive conceptual model. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry 1996;35:1055–1063. [PubMed: 8755803]
Hoagwood KE, Olin SS, Kerker BD, Kratochiwill TR, Crowe M, Saka N. Empirically based school
interventions targeted at academic and mental health functioning. Journal of Emotional and
Behavioral Disorders 2007;15:66–92.
Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004, 20 U.S.C.§ 1400 et seq. (2004)
(Reauthorization of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act)
Jans, L.; Stoddard, S.; Kraus, L. Chartbook on mental health and disability in the United States: An
Infouse Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Institute on Disability and
Rehabilitation Research; 2004.
Jensen PS, Hoagwood K. The book of names: DSM-IV in context. Development and Psychopathology
1997;9:231–249. [PubMed: 9201443]
Jones SM, Brown JL, Hoglund W, Aber JL. A school-randomized clinical trial of an integrated social-
emotional learning and literacy intervention: Impacts on third-grade outcomes. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology. under review.
Atkins et al.
Page 9
Adm Policy Ment Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Kratochwill TR. Preparing psychologists for evidence-based practice: Lessons learned and challenges
ahead. American Psychologist 2007;62:826–843. [PubMed: 18020762]
Kratochwill, TR.; Clements, MA.; Kalymon, KM. Response to intervention: Conceptual and
methodological issues in implementation. In: Jimmerson, SR.; Burns, MK.; VanDerHeyeden, AM.,
editors. The handbook of response to intervention: The science and practice of assessment and
intervention. New York: Springer; 2007. p. 25-52.
Kutash, K.; Duchnowski, AJ. An empirical investigation of a parent support program: Parent connectors.
Paper presented at the 21st annual research conference: A system of care for children's mental health:
Expanding the research base; Tampa, FL. 2008.
Kutash, K.; Duchnowski, A.; Lynn, N. University of South Florida, The Louis De La Parte Florida Mental
Health Institute, Department of Child and Family Studies, Research and Training Center for
Children's Mental Health. School-based mental health: An empirical guide for decision makers. 2006.
Lachat, MA. Data-driven high school reform: The breaking ranks model. Providence, RI: Northeast and
Islands Regional Educational Laboratory, Brown University; 2001.
Landrum TJ, Tamkersley M, Kauffman JM. What is special about special education for students with
emotional and behavior disorders? The Journal of Special Education 2003;37:148–156.
LaRusso, MD.; Brown, JL.; Jones, S.; Aber, JL. School context and microcontexts: The complexity of
studying school settings. In: Dinella, LM., editor. Conducting science-based psychology research in
schools. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; 2009.
Lawson HA, Sailor W. Integrating services, collaborating, and developing connections with schools.
Focus on Exceptional Children 2000;33:1–22.
Lewis TJ, Sugai W. Effective behavior support: A systems approach to proactive school-wide
management. Focus on Exceptional Children 1999;31:1–24.
Linney JA, Seidman E. The future of schooling. American Psychologist 1989;44:36–40.
Locock L, Dopson S, Chambers D, Gabbay J. Understanding the role of opinion leaders in improving
clinical effectiveness. Social Science and Medicine 2001;53:745–757. [PubMed: 11511050]
McKay MM, Bannon WM. Engaging families in child mental health services. Child and Adolescent
Psychiatric Clinics of North America 2004;13:905–921. [PubMed: 15380788]
Minow, ML. Update on implementation of IDEA: Early returns from state studies. Wakefield, MA:
National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum; 2001. Retrieved 9/20/08 from
http://www.cast.org/publications/ncac/ncac_update.html
O'Connell, ME.; Boat, T.; Warner, KE., editors. National Research Council and Institute of Medicine.
Committee on Prevention of Mental Disorders and Substance Abuse among Children, Youth, and
Young Adults: Research Advances and Promising Interventions. Preventing mental, emotional, and
behavioral disorders among young people: Progress and possibilities. Board of Children Youth, and
Families, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education; Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press; 2009.
No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 (2002). Public Law No. 107-110
Payton, J.; Weissberg, RP.; Durlak, JA.; Dymnicki, AB.; Taylor, RD.; Schellinger, KB., et al. The positive
impact of social and emotional learning for kindergarten to eighth-grade students: Findings from
three scientific reviews. Chicago, IL: Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning;
2008.
Pianta, RC.; Allen, JP. Building capacity for positive youth development in secondary school classrooms:
Changing teachers' interactions with students. In: Shinn, M.; Yoshikawa, H., editors. Toward positive
youth development: Transforming schools and community programs. NY: Oxford University Press;
2008. p. 21-39.
President's New Freedom Commission on Mental Health. Achieving the promise: Transforming mental
health care in America Final report (DHHS Publication No. SMA-03–3832). Rockville, MD: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services; 2003.
Reschly, DJ.; Bergstrom, MK. Response to intervention. In: Gutkin, TB.; Reynolds, CR., editors. The
handbook of school psychology. New York: Wiley; 2009.
Ringeisen H, Henderson K, Hoagwood K. Context matters: Schools and the “research to practice gap”
in children's mental health. School Psychology Review 2003;32:153–168.
Atkins et al.
Page 10
Adm Policy Ment Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Rivera M, Al-Otaiba S, Koorland M. Reading instruction for students with emotional and behavioral
disorders and at risk of antisocial behaviors in primary grades: Review of literature. Behavioral
Disorders 2006;31:323–337.
Robbins, V.; Johnston, J.; Barnett, H.; Hobstetter, W.; Kutash, K.; Duchnowski, AJ., et al. Parent to
parent: A synthesis of emerging literature. Tampa, FL: University of South Florida, The Louis de la
Parte Florida Mental Health Institute Department of Child and Family Studies; 2008.
Rogers, EM. Diffusion theory: A theoretical approach to promote community-level change. In: Peterson,
JL.; DiClemente, RJ., editors. Handbook of HIV prevention. New York: Kluwer; 2000. p. 57-65.
Rones M, Hoagwood K. School-based mental health services: A research review. Clinical Child & Family
Psychology Review 2000;34:223–241. [PubMed: 11225738]
Ryan J, Reid R, Epstein M. A review of peer mediated intervention studies on academic achievement for
students with emotional and behavior disorders. Remedial and Special Education 2004;25:330–341.
Seidman, E.; Tseng, V. Changing social settings: A framework for action. In: Aber, M.; Maton, K.;
Seidman, E., editors. Empowering settings and voices for social change. New York: Oxford
University Press; 2010. in press
Sheridan SM, Kratochwill TR. Behavioral parent-teacher consultation: Conceptual and research
considerations. Journal of School Psychology 1992;30:117–139.
Thomson O'Brien MA, Oxman AD, Haynes RB, Davis DA, Freemantle N, Harvey EL. Local opinion
leaders: Effects on professional practice and health care outcomes [Electronic version]. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2006;1
UCLA National Center for Mental Health in Schools. Mental health in schools: Guidelines, models,
resources, & policy considerations. Los Angeles, CA: Author; 2001.
U.S. Department of Education. Twenty-fourth annual report to Congress on implementation of the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. Washington, DC: Author; 2002.
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Elementary and Secondary Education. No child left behind: A
desktop reference. Washington, DC: Author; 2002.
U.S Department of Health, Human Services (U.S DHHS). Mental health: A report of the surgeon general.
Rockville, MD: Author, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Center for
Mental Health Services, National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Mental Health; 1999.
Valente TW, Davis RL. Accelerating the diffusion of innovations using opinion leaders. Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science 1999;566:55–67.
Wagner M, Friend M, Bursuck WD, Kutash K, Duchnowski AJ, Sumi WC, et al. Educating students with
emotional disturbances: A national perspective on school programs and services. Journal of
Emotional and Behavioral Disorders 2006;14:12–30.
Weinstein, RS. Reaching higher: The power of expectations in schooling. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press; 2002.
Weist M, Lever N, Stephan S, Youngstrom E, Moore E, Harrison B, et al. Formative evaluation for high
quality, evidence-based services in school mental health. School Mental Health 2009;1:196–211.
Zins, JE.; Weissberg, RP.; Wang, MC.; Walberg, HJ., editors. Building academic success on social and
emotional learning: What does the research say?. New York: Teachers College Press; 2004.
Atkins et al.
Page 11
Adm Policy Ment Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
